However, the concert tour took place in honor of the 40th anniversary. The two might have aged since they first performed together but neither Carole King nor James Taylor have lost a beat in all these years!The concert film includes the following songs:(You Make Me Feel Like) A Natural WomanSomething in the Way She MovesSo Far AwayCarolina in My MindCountry RoadSmackwater JackWhere You Lead (lyrics changed up as the city they’re playing in replaces New York)Your Smiling FaceBeautifulShower The PeopleWay Over YonderSweet Baby James (this kicks off the second half of the film)Up on the RoofIt’s Too LateFire and RainI Feel the Earth MoveYou’ve Got a FriendHow Sweet It Is (To Be Loved by You)You Can Close Your EyesMexico (end credits)DIRECTOR: Frank MarshallFEATURING: Carole King, James Taylor, Danny Kortchmar, Peter Asher, Russ Kunkel, Leland SklarADDITIONAL MUSICIANS: Andrea Zonn, Arnold McCuller, Kate Markowitz, Robbie KondorCarole King & James Taylor: Just Call Out My Name premiered January 2, 2022, at 9:00pm ET/PT on CNN. The film will be available on demand via cable/satellite systems, CNNgo platforms, and CNN mobile apps, beginning Monday, January 3, through Sunday, January 16.
By   	Althea Legaspi  Carole King and James Taylor perform their own hits — alongside harmonizing on each other’s songs — in the new trailer for concert documentary Carole King & James Taylor: Just Call Out My Name. The film premieres on Jan. 2 at 9:00 p.m. ET via CNN and will livestream via CNNgo. It will be available on demand from Jan. 3 through Jan. 9 via cable and satellite providers, CNNgo, and CNN mobile apps. The exclusive trailer includes archival photos from the first time they performed together in 1970 at the storied Troubadour, alongside King and Taylor being interviewed in July 2021 at the Southern New Hampshire University Arena in Manchester. The clip features setlist highlights from their 2010 Troubadour reunion tour, where they duet “It’s Too Late,” “Sweet Baby James,” and “You’ve Got a Friend.” King also delivers “So Far Away” and Taylor performs “Fire and Rain.” Directed by Frank Marshall and commissioned by CNN Films and HBO Max, the documentary showcases previously unseen performance footage from their 1970 Troubadour concert debut, the pair reprising that show for the West Hollywood venue’s own 50th anniversary in 2007, and several full song performances from their 2010 reunion tour.
The new CBS drama Good Sam is likely to draw viewers towards more shows that revolve around medical drama and family issues.  Starring Jason Isaacs and Sophia Bush, Good Sam delves into the strenuous father-daughter relationship between Dr. Sam Griffith and Dr. Rob Griffith. Tensions increase as the duo also happen to work in the same hospital.  RELATED: 10 Medical Dramas That Are Better Than Grey's Anatomy Good Sam serves as an interesting watch for medical drama fans. So, it is natural for audiences to also check out other genre classics like Grey’s Anatomy and contemporary shows like The Good Doctor. At the same time, Good Sam’s complex family dynamics imply that viewers can also binge their way through some acclaimed “dysfunctional family dramas”.  ABC's The Good Doctor's main character Shaun Murphy is a brilliant surgeon who relocates to a prestigious California hospital. Along with saving patient lives, he struggles to get over his troubled past and to counter his social insecurities. The show benefits greatly from Freddie Highmore’s committed performance as he emulates the optimistic nature of the lead character.  Fans of Good Sam must check out The Good Doctor for it shows how a doctor’s psyche can influence the operation. Even though Sam is still in her good-natured self, Rob is shown as a talented yet hot-headed surgeon.
Edwin Hodge injects some diversity into the main cast as Malcolm Kingsley, a member of the wealthy Kinglsey family who underwrites the funding for the hospital. As the hospital's new head of finance, he also serves as a love interest for Sam, who is just getting over a previous relationship. Sam's team of doctors (Skye P. Marshall, Omar Maskati, Davi Santos, Michael Stahl-David) round out the secondary characters, most notably Marshall, who plays Dr. Lex Trulie, her best friend hiding a huge secret. Overall, Good Sam riffs on what CBS is known for -- comforting problem-of-the-week dramas -- and adds a new level of spice and interest to the proceedings. Fans of the genre will undoubtedly want to go on the ride Good Sam has in store for them. Families can talk about familial relationships. What do you think about the relationships in the series? What do you think is keeping the Griffith family from being closer? How does Sam demonstrate great leadership? How does Sam provide compassion and empathy to her patients and fellow doctors? Why does Sam feel unappreciated? How did she prove herself in the show? How should Sam's father, Dr. Rob Griffith, treat his daughter?  Research shows a connection between kids' healthy self-esteem and positive portrayals in media. That's why we've added a new "Diverse Representations" section to our reviews that will be rolling out on an ongoing basis.
The 2022 Citrus Bowl was a college football bowl game played on January 1, 2022, with kickoff at 1:00 p.m. EST and televised on ABC.[4] It was the 76th edition of the Citrus Bowl, and was one of the 2021–22 bowl games concluding the 2021 FBS football season. Sponsored by Vrbo, a vacation rental marketplace owned by the HomeAway division of Expedia, the game was officially known as the VRBO Citrus Bowl.  In the first meeting between the two programs, the game featured the Kentucky Wildcats of the Southeastern Conference (SEC) and the Iowa Hawkeyes of the Big Ten Conference. Both teams received and accepted invitations on Sunday, December 5.[5]  The Wildcats entered the Citrus Bowl with a 9–3 record (5–3 SEC) and a No. 22 ranking in the final CFP poll. Kentucky made its second Citrus Bowl appearance (2019).  The Hawkeyes, winners of the Big Ten West Division, entered the Citrus Bowl with a 10–3 record (7–2 B1G) and a No. 15 ranking in the final CFP poll. Iowa also made its second Citrus Bowl appearance (2005).  at Camping World Stadium • Orlando, Florida
Quad Wilson picked off Jack Albers and returned it 99 yards for a touchdown, putting a bow on the 2022-23 season to secure the Citrus Bowl victory, 63-7.             © LSU Athletics, Louisiana State University, 2023. All rights reserved.                                     /                                Privacy Policy                                          /                                Terms of Service                                          /                                Brand Guidelines                                          /                                NCAA Infractions Decision
A hugely successful high school quarterback, he threw for over 5,300 yards and 59 touchdowns at North Florida Christian High School before spending the early part of his college career at FSU. However, it was at West Virginia where his playing career took off, leading the Big 12 in completion percentage in 2014 while becoming a semifinalist for the Davey O’Brien Award. A new addition to the Marshall coaching staff for the 2023 college football season, Jason Semore becomes the Thundering Herd’s defensive coordinator. He arrives in Huntington having spent the last season with Georgia Tech, the latest stop on a varied and successful coaching career that has seen him gain experience in multiple roles at several different levels of competition. A linebacker at Adams State from 2001-2005, Semore spent 2022 working with the Georgia Tech linebackers and was slated to become their special teams coordinator with responsibilities for nickel backs and safeties. Instead, he reprises a role he previously held at Valdosta State, Montana, and the Colorado School of Mines, in addition to co-DC duties at his alma mater. He has tasted success in each of those stints. Semore helped lead Colorado School of Mines to a 10-2 season, assisted Montana in achieving three consecutive winning seasons and top-ranked Big Sky defense, and his defense fueled a Valdosta State run to the DII title game in 2021.
by Andy Demetra (The Voice of the Yellow Jackets) Inside The Chart On The Map: The upbringing that makes newly minted special teams coordinator Jason Semore unlike almost any coach in Division I football You’ve read this story before. Kid grows up a small-town coach’s son. Follows his dad into the business.  Grinds his way up the coaching ladder, establishing his own success. That doesn’t make Jason Semore all that different from the scores of other coaches’ sons who populate the staffs around college football. After playing for his dad in high school, then lettering in college, Semore has spent the past 17 years hopscotching from Division II to FCS to FBS, from one side of the country to the other, from small-school coordinator to Power-5 analyst and now, finally, to linebackers coach at Georgia Tech. On Monday he was promoted to the Yellow Jackets’ special teams coordinator, a role he also held in 2015 at the University of Montana. But Semore’s background makes him unlike any coach’s son at the Division I level. Maybe any coach in Division I, period. And the answer lies innocuously at the top of his bio. Hometown: Ganado, Ariz. It’s an easy piece of information to gloss over, or skim past, or remain incurious about. Every coach and player has it listed obligatorily on their roster page.
The EV maker doesn't disclose U.S.-only sales figures but claims sales for the year were up an amazing 87 percent in a turbulent marketplace. Anyone who thinks the legacy automakers are catching Tesla in the electric-vehicle sales race should take a quick look at some recently released figures. Over the weekend, Tesla announced it delivered 308,600 vehicles in the fourth quarter of 2021. Model S and Model X EVs made up 11,750 of those deliveries, while the bulk—296,850—were Model 3 and Model Y deliveries. These numbers brought Tesla's 2021 full-year deliveries to 936,172 vehicles. The 936,000 vehicle deliveries represent an 87 percent increase from 2020, Reuters and other news sources noted,  based on Tesla's announcement dated January 2, while the 306,600 deliveries for the quarter mean that Tesla delivered 71 percent more electric vehicles in the fourth quarter of 2021 than it did a year earlier. Reuters reportssemiconductor chipsTesla doesn't break out its deliveries by country, but its sales are strongest in Europe and China, the  notes. Tesla itself called those two regions "important markets" in its last SEC filing, but the U.S. is still the region where Tesla makes the most money. In the third quarter of 2021, for example, an  shows Tesla made more than $6 billion in revenue in the U.S., compared to $3.
AUSTIN, Texas, January 2, 2022 – In the fourth quarter, we achieved production of more than 305,000 vehicles and deliveries of over 308,000 vehicles. In 2021, we delivered over 936,000 vehicles. Thank you to all of our customers, employees, suppliers, shareholders and supporters who helped us achieve a great year.       *************** Our net income and cash flow results will be announced along with the rest of our financial performance when we announce Q4 earnings. Our delivery count should be viewed as slightly conservative, as we only count a car as delivered if it is transferred to the customer and all paperwork is correct. Final numbers could vary by up to 0.5% or more. Tesla vehicle deliveries represent only one measure of the company’s financial performance and should not be relied on as an indicator of quarterly financial results, which depend on a variety of factors, including the cost of sales, foreign exchange movements and mix of directly leased vehicles. Investor Relations Contact: ir@tesla.
Evo Entertainment Group has acquired 100 percent of the stock of Showbiz Cinemas in an all-cash deal. The companies did not disclose the full details of the acquisition. "Today is a monumental moment for our company and our industry,” said Mitch Roberts, founder and CEO of Evo Entertainment Group and 2022 Forbes 30 Under 30 honoree. “This transaction establishes Evo as the country’s largest operator of cinema-entertainment centers and paves the way for accelerated progress and innovation within a new era of cinema.” Roberts and Kevin Mitchell, CEO and founder of Showbiz Cinemas, represent multiple generations in the cinema business. Their pioneering of cinema entertainment centers has been a genuine success. Said Mitchell, "It is a wonderful time to entrust the company I started to a fourth-generation motion picture exhibitor and family member, because Showbiz Cinemas just had an all-time record-breaking holiday season! I am confident that Mitch’s leadership and Marbella’s capital strength will ensure a long and successful run for Showbiz, and I now look forward to exploring new ventures both in and out of the entertainment industry.
The acquisition represents the partnership’s first major move. The deal will result in a combined business with 16 venues in Texas, Florida, Oklahoma and Wyoming. Those locations serve over eight million customers annually with 148 screens, 108 bowling lanes, nine restaurants and bars, and a 3,000-capacity live music venue. Showbiz’s only Dallas-Fort Worth location is in Waxahachie. Its theaters combine movies with other entertainment, such as bowling or arcades. Roberts said the branding will not change for the Showbiz Cinemas locations. EVO said it will continue to expand in 2022, with new locations under construction. The company’s website shows upcoming locations in Dallas, Southlake and San Antonio. Roberts said the Southlake location will open this spring and the Dallas theater will debut this summer. Showbiz Cinemas just wrapped up a record-breaking holiday season, according to founder and CEO Kevin Mitchell. He’s also a former Cinemark executive and third-generation theater owner. “I am confident that Mitch’s leadership and Marbella’s capital strength will ensure a long and successful run for Showbiz,” he said in a statement. Paul O'Donnell, Business Editor. Paul directs the work of an award-winning staff covering business news in the nation's fourth largest metro region. He's been The News' business editor since 2015. Before that, he was editor-in-chief at the Dallas Business Journal and business editor at the Cleveland Plain Dealer.
Super Bowl LVI[12] was an American football game played to determine the champion of the National Football League (NFL) for the 2021 season. The National Football Conference (NFC) champion Los Angeles Rams defeated the American Football Conference (AFC) champion Cincinnati Bengals, 23–20. The game was played on February 13, 2022, at SoFi Stadium in Inglewood, California, the home stadium of the Rams, marking the second consecutive and second overall Super Bowl with a team playing and winning in its home stadium.[13][14][15][16]  The Rams' victory was their second, first as a Los Angeles-based team, and first since winning 1999's Super Bowl XXXIV when they were based in St. Louis. Finishing with a 12–5 record, the Rams reached their fifth appearance after acquiring veteran quarterback Matthew Stafford, who had not won a playoff game in his previous 12 years with the Detroit Lions. The Bengals, who finished with a 10–7 record, were seeking their first Super Bowl title following several decades of losing seasons and playoff struggles. They won their first playoff game since 1990, ending the longest drought in the four major North American sports, en route to their third Super Bowl appearance and first since 1988's Super Bowl XXIII.
The Super Bowl 2023 stadium is ready to host the greatest show on turf. The United States of America: the land of the free, the Super Bowl and some of the greatest sports stadiums the world has ever seen. Brand new behemoths continue to spring up across the land with fresh, state-of-the-art stadiums generally favoured by the NFL to host the Super Bowl in their first couple of years after opening. Last year saw the SoFi Stadium in Los Angeles given a starring role after opening in 2020, while the Mercedes-Benz Arena in Atlanta and US Bank Stadium in Minneapolis have each been christened with the Super Bowl in recent times. The new Allegient Stadium in Las Vegas, home to the relocated Raiders, also opened in 2020 but is not scheduled to host the Super Bowl until 2024, meaning another relatively old stadium has leaped in to fill the gap. RadioTimes.com brings you everything you need to know about the Super Bowl stadium in 2023. The Super Bowl will be held in Glendale, Arizona this year. The area last hosted the Super Bowl in 2015, a relatively short space of time to host the event twice. State Farm Stadium – home of the Arizona Cardinals – will host the Super Bowl for the third time in history. It hosted the 2008 and 2015 Super Bowl games under the guise of University of Phoenix Stadium before State Farm assumed naming rights.
On February 21, 2022, Truth Social was released on Apple iOS,[98] reaching number one on the App Store's top charts.[99][100] Due to an extensive backlog of applicants, upon downloading the app, about 500,000 people who initially attempted to register as users were automatically waitlisted.[101][102][103]  The app was installed 872,000 times during its first week, but a month later, new user signup had fallen to 60,000 per week. During that time, weekly visits to truthsocial.com fell from 6 million to fewer than 2 million.[104]  Upon its launch, the British automotive solar power company Trailar complained Truth Social's app logo closely resembled its "T" logo.[105]  The platform has been criticized for its poor performance at launch, with waitlisting users attempting to register and extended outages.[106] A day after its launch, The Washington Post described it as "a disaster".[101] A week after, Newsweek reported some early adopters were beginning to lose interest in the app due to low numbers of users and poor engagement, although others were willing to persevere with the app to see if things would improve.[107]  The Truth Social platform suffered from severe and persistent problems with scalability at launch, limiting the platform's growth.[108][109]
With the Android app still unavailable, not a lot has actually changed since Truth Social launched on iPhone. However, there's a workaround. The Truth Social app is still not available to download on Android devices, although it is expected to arrive at some point in the near future. Truth Social is a much newer social media network compared to the likes of Facebook and Twitter, and it is one that promises to offer an open platform that doesn’t discriminate against users based on their political ideology. In fact, this political ideology promise is exactly why Truth Social came to be in the first place. Following the wide banning of Donald Trump across multiple social media network sites in 2021, an alternative service that didn’t censor its users was advertised as in the works. In February of 2022, that alternative service manifested in the launch of Truth Social on iPhone. At the time, Android support was understood to be coming, but there's was no clear indication of when. Related: Trump's Truth Social Posts On Other Platforms Delay, Explained In terms of Android support, not a lot has actually changed since then, and it remains unknown when Truth Social will be available to download from the Google Play Store. Comments last month from the Truth Social CEO confirmed the app was still en route, explaining that it was waiting on approval from Google before it can be made available via the Play Store. How long that approval process takes typically depends on the app.
Best Picture Drama: “The Power of the Dog” Jane Campion’s first film in more than a decade, “The Power of the Dog,” took home the most prestigious award of the night. “Power of the Dog” won Best Picture Drama, Best Director Motion Picture (Jane Campion), and Best Supporting Actor — Motion Picture (Kodi Smit-McPhee).  The acclaimed Netflix drama was the most-nominated movie along with “Belfast,” with each film earning seven nominations. Campion became the third woman to win in this category at Golden Globes. Best Television Series — Musical or Comedy: “Hacks” HBO Max’s “Hacks” won the main Television (Musical or Comedy) category and Best Actress — Comedy/Musical for star Jean Smart at the 79th Golden Globes Awards. While other shows in this category were also strong contenders, such as Apple TV+’s “Ted Lasso,” “Hacks” proved to be a favorite in this category with its first season. “Hacks can laugh all the way to the bank with this one,” announced the official Golden Globes account via Twitter. “Congratulations on taking home the #GoldenGlobe for Best Musical/Comedy Series.” Best Television Series — Drama: “Succession” HBO’s “Succession” was the big winner at this year’s Golden Globes, scooping three major categories.
On the TV side, ABC comedy Abbott Elementary — which boasted the most nominations of any show with five — built off of its Emmy momentum and went to the head of the class, winning best comedy honors and Golden Globes for Quinta Brunson and Tyler James Williams. An even bigger Emmy magnet, HBO's The White Lotus, enjoyed the privilege of converting its four nominations into two awards, one for best limited series and another for Jennifer Coolidge (who also delivered the funniest speech of the night). And then Game of Thrones prequel House of the Dragon added some surprise to the night by claiming the best drama award. Elsewhere, Tár's Cate Blanchett, Black Panther: Wakanda Forever's Angela Bassett, and Elvis' Austin Butler scored trophies, along with The Bear's Jeremy Allen White, Euphoria's Zendaya, and Yellowstone's Kevin Costner. In addition, Murphys were honored: Five-time Globe winner Ryan Murphy was given the Carol Burnett Award and Eddie Murphy was handed the Cecil B. DeMille Award. Find out who else had a Golden night by checking out our complete list of winners.
THE FLATS – Georgia Tech softball 2023 season and single-game tickets are now on sale and can be purchased HERE. Season tickets are located in the reserved chairback sections of Mewborn Field and cost $100 per seat. Season ticket members enjoy every game in the same seat for a discounted rate. Single-game tickets are also available as detailed below. More ticketing information, including the steps to become a member of the Mew Crew and the benefits of joining, can be found on the official Georgia Tech Softball Tickets page. Single-Game Pricing: Reserved Chairback: $5 Adult GA Bench: $3 Youth/Senior GA Bench: $2 Group (10+) GA Bench: $2 Standing room only tickets will be sold for $2 each if all other sections are sold out. Georgia Tech students and faculty/staff can receive free admission to regular season home games while seats remain available by showing a valid BuzzCard at the entrance. Tech’s 56-game 2023 regular season schedule is highlighted by 33 home games and four Atlantic Coast Conference series at Mewborn Field. The Yellow Jackets will also host three home tournaments, most notably the ACC/B1G Challenge, as well as a pair of SEC schools, including this season’s edition of Clean, Old-Fashioned Hate. The White and Gold are slated to face six ranked opponents throughout the year, hosting four of them for eight total games.
Georgia Tech students must meet one of the following criteria to be eligible to claim/purchase a student ticket for games at Bobby Dodd Stadium: The list of eligible students is provided to the GTAA by GT Registrar. Students who are deemed eligible may purchase student season tickets, however, if the Athletic Fee is not paid, season tickets will be removed from their account. Eligible students have two options for student tickets at Bobby Dodd Stadium: *Yellow Jacket Club Gold Members have two season-ticket options: 1) Register as part of a student organization, including Greek chapters; and 2) register and sit in the ‘SWARM’ block – the sections on each side of the Georgia Tech Marching Band. Seats are available first-come, first-served. 2022-2023 PricingRegular Student Membership – $15Gold Student Membership – $65 PURCHASE YELLOW JACKET CLUB MEMBERSHIP CLAIM FREE SINGLE-GAME TICKET For 2021-22 regular season home games Georgia Tech students only need to show their valid BuzzCard at the West Entrance of McCamish Pavilion for entry. Seats are available on a first-come, first-served basis with gates opening 1 hour prior to tipoff – no sign-up/registration needed unless otherwise mentioned for the game.* 200 courtside seats are reserved for Georgia Tech students and will be available on a first-come, first-served basis and will be given a wristband in order to gain access to the courtside seating.
The 2022 Winter Olympics (2022年冬季奥林匹克运动会), officially called the XXIV Olympic Winter Games (Chinese: 第二十四届冬季奥林匹克运动会; pinyin: Dì Èrshísì Jiè Dōngjì Àolínpǐkè Yùndònghuì) and commonly known as Beijing 2022 (北京2022), was an international winter multi-sport event held from 4 to 20 February 2022 in Beijing, China, and surrounding areas with competition in selected events beginning 2 February 2022.[1] It was the 24th edition of the Winter Olympic Games.  Beijing was selected as host city in 2015 at the 128th IOC Session in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, marking its second time hosting the Olympics, and the last of three consecutive Olympics hosted in East Asia following the 2018 Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang County, South Korea, and the 2020 Summer Olympics in Tokyo, Japan. Having previously hosted the 2008 Summer Olympics, Beijing became the first city to have hosted both the Summer and Winter Olympics.
There were three different clusters of venues designed and constructed for the 2022 Winter Olympics, each respectively known as the Beijing Zone, the Zhangjiakou Zone, and the Yanging Zone.[16]  Venues in the Beijing Zone exist in different conditions; some were recently constructed exclusively for the 2022 games, while the rest were renovated from the 2008 Summer Olympics or other existing sites.[17] The Beijing Zone of the 2022 Winter Olympics consisted of six competition venues and was where the Opening and Closing Ceremonies, for both the 2022 Winter Olympics and 2008 Summer Olympics, would take place.[17]  Five ice events were held at the Olympic Green, the Capital Indoor Stadium and the Beijing Wukesong Sports Center, which had been some of the main venues of the 2008 Summer Olympics. The Big Air snowboarding and freestyle skiing events were held in a former industrial area in Shijingshan District, at Western Hills area.[18] Since the end of 2009, the Beijing Olympic Village apartments on the Olympic Green had been transformed into a residential area. There was therefore a need to build another Olympic Village on a smaller scale for the Winter Olympics. These new buildings are located in the southern area of Olympic Green on the neighbourhood of the National Olympic Sports Center and will serves as Chinese Olympic Committee residential complex for those athletes who will undergo training sessions at the nearby venues.[19]
The two Spanish giants will meet in the Spanish Super Cup final for the eighth time with Real Madrid having won six and losing once. Get match time in India. Defending champions Real Madrid will take on arch-rivals Barcelona in the Supercopa de Espana 2022-23 final at the King Fahd International Stadium in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia on Sunday.  The Spanish Super Cup, changed from a two-team format to a four-team football tournament in 2019-20, features the winners and runners-up of La Liga and Copa del Rey.  Barcelona are the most successful team at the Spanish Super Cup football tournament with 13 titles. However, the Blaugrana have lost six of their seven Super Cup finals against Real Madrid and are still to win a title after the new four-team format was introduced.  Real Madrid and Barcelona booked their places for the first El Clasico of 2023 by beating Valencia and Real Betis in the semi-finals, respectively.  Real Madrid, who are one shy of equalling Barcelona’s record of 13 Super Cup titles, won their semi-final 4-2 in the penalty shootout after Karim Benzema’s first-half goal from the spot was cancelled out by Valencia in the second-half.  Barcelona, meanwhile, took the lead twice against Real Betis through Robert Lewandowski and Ansu Fati but had to win the match through penalties.
“We knew it was a chance we had to take, we have lived through an era of changes at the club and in the dressing room, and this will reinforce us to keep fighting for more titles,” said Barca captain Sergio Busquets. “You know how [Gavi] competes, he’s very young. Most players at his age would be in the youth team, and he’s playing at an incredible level, giving assists, getting goals.” Madrid eliminated Barcelona in last season’s semi-finals, but the Spanish powerhouses had never met in the final of the revamped competition. The Super Cup used to be played between the Spanish league champion and the Copa del Rey winner. Now the runners-up in both competitions also participate. Madrid played as the league champion and Barcelona as the league runner-up. The current contract to play the Super Cup in Saudi Arabia runs through the 2024-25 season.
January 18, 2022			 			 | Microsoft News Center  REDMOND, Wash. and Santa Monica, Calif. – Jan. 18, 2022 – With three billion people actively playing games today, and fueled by a new generation steeped in the joys of interactive entertainment, gaming is now the largest and fastest-growing form of entertainment. Today, Microsoft Corp. (Nasdaq: MSFT) announced plans to acquire Activision Blizzard Inc. (Nasdaq: ATVI), a leader in game development and interactive entertainment content publisher. This acquisition will accelerate the growth in Microsoft’s gaming business across mobile, PC, console and cloud and will provide building blocks for the metaverse. Microsoft will acquire Activision Blizzard for $95.00 per share, in an all-cash transaction valued at $68.7 billion, inclusive of Activision Blizzard’s net cash. When the transaction closes, Microsoft will become the world’s third-largest gaming company by revenue, behind Tencent and Sony. The planned acquisition includes iconic franchises from the Activision, Blizzard and King studios like “Warcraft,” “Diablo,” “Overwatch,” “Call of Duty” and “Candy Crush,” in addition to global eSports activities through Major League Gaming. The company has studios around the world with nearly 10,000 employees.
The FTC, after failing to obtain injunctions to block the merger, formally withdrew its challenge in July 2023, and the CMA subsequently agreed to put the case on hold to negotiate with both companies. The deal is now expected to close by October 18, 2023.  Activision Blizzard is one of the largest video game publishers in the world, with annual revenues of about $8.8 billion in 2021.[1] The company is composed of five business units:[2] Activision Publishing, Blizzard Entertainment, King,[3] Major League Gaming,[4] and Activision Blizzard Studios.[5][6] Among its assets are ownership of Call of Duty, Crash Bandicoot, and Spyro from Activision's studios; Warcraft, Diablo, StarCraft, and Overwatch from Blizzard Entertainment; and Candy Crush Saga from King.[7][8]  Microsoft is a dominant player in computing software, and also makes the Xbox line of game consoles and operates Xbox Game Studios, a collection of developers to create first party titles. In March 2021, Microsoft closed on its acquisition of ZeniMax Media and Bethesda Softworks for an estimated $7.5 billion, making it one of the largest video game acquisitions by that time.[9]  On January 18, 2022, Microsoft announced its intent to acquire Activision Blizzard for $68.7 billion in an all-cash deal, or approximately $95 per share.
A star-studded lineup of Super Bowl LVII commercials is set to hit our screens on Sunday. While millions of people will be tuning into the intense NFL action between the Kansas City Chiefs and Philadelphia Eagles, a large sum will be even more excited for the iconic commercials. The cost for a 30-second commercial during this year’s Super Bowl is reaching a record-high amount, with advertisers hoping their ad makes a bang for the viewers. Ahead of the game, let’s take a look at the costs of a Super Bowl commercial in 2023 and more history about the big game day ads: In 2023, a 30-second Super Bowl commercial costs a record-high average of $7 million, according to Forbes. In 2022, a 30-second commercial slot during the Super Bowl was $6.5 million, which was an increase from the $5.5 million asked for in 2021. Here were the prices in some recent previous years:  Connecting you to your favorite North Texas sports teams as well as sports news around the globe. There's a reason commercials during the Super Bowl have to refer to the event as the "Big Game" rather than "Super Bowl LVII." The reason is that the term has been a registered NFL trademark since 1969, requiring commercials, radio hosts and other specific media personnel to pay to use the official name.
The pandemic had a minor but noticeable effect as the cost of a 30-second spot in the 2021 Super Bowl was $5.5 million – down $100,000 from the pre-pandemic high of $5.6 million.  GET FOX BUSINESS ON THE GO BY CLICKING HERE YouTube announced that it will bring back the AdBlitz for the 16th year running, noting that 72% of fans rewatch at least some football commercials. AdBlitz already has several 2022 teaser ads to provide a taste of what will be the most expensive advertisement offering ever.               Quotes displayed in real-time or delayed by at least 15 minutes. Market data provided by Factset.             Powered and implemented by FactSet Digital Solutions.              Legal Statement.          This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. ©2023 FOX News Network, LLC. All rights reserved.
(SSC/Alan Alabastro) The Seattle Sports Commission hosted the 87th annual Seattle Sports Star of the Year Awards Show at the Westin in Seattle, Wash. on May 26, 2022. (SSC/Alan Alabastro) The Seattle Sports Commission hosted the 87th annual Seattle Sports Star of the Year Awards Show at the Westin in Seattle, Wash. on May 26, 2022. (SSC/Alan Alabastro) The Seattle Sports Commission hosted the 87th annual Seattle Sports Star of the Year Awards Show at the Westin in Seattle, Wash. on May 26, 2022. (SSC/Alan Alabastro) The Seattle Sports Commission hosted the 87th annual Seattle Sports Star of the Year Awards Show at the Westin in Seattle, Wash. on May 26, 2022. (SSC/Alan Alabastro) The Seattle Sports Commission hosted the 87th annual Seattle Sports Star of the Year Awards Show at the Westin in Seattle, Wash. on May 26, 2022. (SSC/Alan Alabastro) The Seattle Sports Commission hosted the 87th annual Seattle Sports Star of the Year Awards Show at the Westin in Seattle, Wash. on May 26, 2022.
The spotlight will shine on the best high school student athletes and coaches in the country at the 2023 USA TODAY National High School Sports Awards! The national show is a culmination of numerous regional and statewide award programs from across the country. Hosted by Christine Brennan and Cydney Henderson of USA TODAY Sports, and Ryan O’Leary and Barrett Fontana of USA TODAY NETWORK Ventures, this video podcast-style production by Ventures Events will announce more than 35 awards and feature stories of high school athletics from across the country. Tune in to see who will be named the nation’s best at 8 p.m. EDT this Sunday, July 30, right here on the Sports Awards website, YouTube, Facebook Watch, Spotify, or the USA TODAY channel available on most streaming services. LATEST UPDATE: The 2023 USA TODAY National High School Sports Awards show premieres this Sunday, July 30, at 8 p.m. EDT. Don’t miss it!  Day(s) :  Hour(s) :  Minute(s) :  Second(s) Click the video title or ‘Watch on YouTube’ below to see a preview of the show. Then, click ‘Notify Me’ to receive a YouTube notification when the 2023 USA TODAY National High School Sports Awards premiere this Sunday at 8 p.m. EDT! Below are the sports and awards that are part of the National USA TODAY High School Sports Awards.
January 21, 2022 Ford Greene, Ralph Long Jr., and Lawrence Williams, Georgia Tech’s first Black students, and Ronald Yancey, Tech’s first Black graduate, will receive the 2022 Ivan Allen Jr. Prize for Social Courage. The Ivan Allen Jr. Prize for Social Courage was established in 2010 to honor Tech alumnus and former Atlanta Mayor Ivan Allen Jr. Funded in perpetuity by a grant from the Wilbur and Hilda Glenn Family Foundation, the prize includes a $100,000 stipend for recipients. The inaugural prize was awarded in March 2011. It recognizes exemplary, courageous leaders — those who, like Mayor Allen, take on personal risks in an effort to improve the lives of others,” said Georgia Tech President Ángel Cabrera.  “With great determination, Ford Greene, Ralph Long Jr., Lawrence Williams, and Ronald Yancey withstood hazards and adversity of every kind to prove to the world that Black students had the right to study at Georgia Tech, paving the way for the thousands of Black Yellow Jackets who have earned their degrees here since.” Greene, Long, and Williams, dubbed the “three pioneers” in the Harrison Square sculpture that depicts them on their first day at Tech, began classes in the fall of 1961. And, although their arrival didn’t elicit violence as it had at other southern universities, it was not easy.
Peterson lauded Nunn for courage and commitment to his own moral compass, for standing up for his beliefs, and for enacting meaningful and sustainable solutions for making the world a better, and more peaceful place.[4]  The Ivan Allen Jr. Prize for Social Courage was established in 2010 by the Georgia Institute of Technology.  The international award honors individuals whose life and work embody the moral courage personified by former Atlanta Mayor Ivan Allen Jr.[14] The Prize underscores the Institute’s mission to improve the human condition by recognizing those around the globe who, like Mayor Allen, have risked everything to stand up for moral principle and have made a positive difference in the world.[15]  The Prize is funded in perpetuity by a grant from the Wilbur and Hilda Glenn Family Foundation.[14]  The prize's forerunner was the Ivan Allen Jr. Prize for Progress and Service, which was awarded annually from 2001–2010 by the Georgia Tech.[14]  The nominating committee is responsible for assessing candidates who meet the requirements of the prize, demonstrating social courage in adverse circumstances. Each year after deliberation, the committee submits a nominee to the president of the Georgia Institute of Technology, who makes the final selection.  Joseph R. Bankoff, Chair, President & CEO, Woodruff Arts Center;  Susan E. Eisenhower, Chairman Emeritus, The Eisenhower Institute, United States Department of Energy, Blue Ribbon Commission on America's Nuclear Future; Dr.
12]  In January 2022, The Verge reported that Google was building an AR headset which used "outward-facing cameras to blend computer graphics with a video feed of the real world", internally codenamed Project Iris and being developed in a highly secretive and secure facility located in the San Francisco Bay Area. Overseen by Bavor, the headset was to be powered by the Android operating system as well as a custom system on a chip akin to Tensor, expected to launch in 2024 alongside Project Starline. Other key people named as part of the project include Shahram Izadi, Eddie Chung, Scott Huffman, Kurt Akeley, and Lucovsky.[13] An early prototype of the headset bore a close resemblance to the North Focals.[14] In March, The Information reported that Google would acquire Raxium, an AR hardware startup, for approximately $1 billion, and would continue to make further acquisitions to assist in their AR and mixed reality (MR) work.[15] The acquisition was completed a month later.[16]  In May 2022, Google unveiled a different version of Iris resembling eyeglasses with live translation capabilities during the 2022 Google I/O keynote.[14][17][18] The company began publicly testing these prototypes across the U.S. in August,[19] before expanding into Canada in October.[20] According to Business Insider, Google executives' constantly changing strategy for Project Iris frustrated employees.
Besides, the Google Employee Clay Bavor that lead the Cardboard; DayDream VR as well as the recent big-time project of the company; Project Starline is working for this upcoming project. Although, the release of this project is slated until 2024 which gives an ample time slot of two years for research and development. The project along with Clay Bavor includes up to 300 more employees working on the Iris AR headsets along with the Google Assistant creator Scott Huffman. Moreover, the list goes on featuring Google AR operating systems senior director Mark Lucovsky; ARCore manager Shahram Izadi, and former light-field camera startup Lytro CTO Kurt Akeley. There’s no correct information regarding the branding of this gadget as a Pixel device or not as of now. Be the Change! Spread the word and help us create better tech                     content Kaushik Battu A techie who is curious about the latest tech updates around the world. Have a keen interest in Automobiles and an occasional gamer. The comments section is to assist our readers with any inquiries. Each comment undergoes rigorous moderation before it can be approved for publication.Your name and comment will be publicly visible. Your email address will not be published.Required fields are marked * Comment *  Name *  Email *  Website  Save my details (Name, Email, and Website) in browser and automatically add them when I visit next time.
Meta Unveils AI Supercomputer for the Metaverse   					This item in 					  						japanese 					   Feb 01, 2022 								 								 								 									 									2 									min read 								 							 by    Daniel Dominguez   Meta has unveiled its AI Research SuperCluster (RSC) supercomputer, aimed at accelerating AI research and helping the company build the metaverse. The RSC will help the company build new and better AI models, working across hundreds of different languages, and to develop new augmented reality tools. Developing the next generation of advanced AI will require powerful new computers capable of quintillions of operations per second. Meta’s researchers have already started using RSC to train large models in natural-language processing (NLP) and computer vision for research, with the aim of one day training models with trillions of parameters across Meta’s businesses, from content-moderation algorithms used to detect hate speech on Facebook and Instagram, to augmented-reality features that will one day be available in the metaverse. RSC can train models that use multimodal signals to determine whether an action, sound or image is harmful or benign. Meta claims this will not only help keep people safe on Meta’s services today, but also in the metaverse.
Meta Unveils New AI Supercomputer Listen (2 min) Meta Unveils New AI Supercomputer Listen (2 min)  This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com.  https://www.wsj.com/articles/meta-unveils-new-ai-supercomputer-11643043601 By  Jan. 24, 2022 12:00 pm ET Listen (2 min) Meta Platforms Inc. said Monday that its research team built a new artificial intelligence supercomputer that the company maintains will soon be the fastest in the world. Copyright ©2023 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8 Continue reading your article witha WSJ subscription Already a subscriber? Sign In WSJ Membership Customer Service Tools & Features Ads More Dow Jones Products WSJ Membership Customer Service Tools & Features Ads More Copyright ©2023 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved  This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact
We will continue to provide more information about the transition to the digital SAT Suite of Assessments throughout 2023 and early 2024. We are making a full transition to digital, so once we begin administering the SAT Suite digitally we will no longer offer a paper and pencil version of the tests. Though we will continue to support students who test with accommodations that require a paper and pencil test. That means:    Read more   Students will be able to register for the first digital SAT administrations at international test centers starting in fall 2022. We’ll share more information about registration and administration dates later this year. We’re administering the digital SAT first at international test centers in spring 2023. It will then be offered in the U.S. beginning in spring 2024. Most students who take the SAT do so for the first time in the spring of their junior year. So, for students testing internationally, those in the class of 2024 will be the first to take the digital SAT. In the U.S., students in the high school class of 2025 will be the first class to take the digital SAT.  Students everywhere will take the digital PSAT 8/9 and PSAT/NMSQT starting in fall 2023. They will take the PSAT 10 starting in spring of 2024.    Read more
01/25/2022 83% of Students Say They Want Option to Submit Scores in College Applications  College Board New York — College Board announced today that the SAT® Suite of Assessments will be delivered digitally. In November 2021, College Board piloted the digital SAT in the U.S. and internationally; 80% of students responded that they found it to be less stressful and 100% of educators reported having a positive experience. While the transition to digital will bring a number of student- and educator-friendly changes, many important features of the SAT Suite (SAT, PSAT/NMSQT®, PSAT™ 10, PSAT™ 8/9) will stay the same. The SAT Suite will continue to measure the knowledge and skills that students are learning in high school and that matter most for college and career readiness. The SAT will still be scored on a 1600 scale, and educators and students can continue to track growth across the SAT Suite of Assessments over time. The assessments will continue to be administered in a school or in a test center with a proctor present—not at home. Students will still have access to free practice resources on Khan Academy. And students taking the SAT Suite will continue to connect to scholarships and the College Board National Recognition Programs.
What may be the biggest Paralympic Winter Games in history is coming our way in March 2022. Get up to speed on when they're happening, what sports are being contested and more. The 2022 Winter Paralympics begin on March 4, 2022, and will be shown on NBC, Peacock, USA Network, Olympic Channel, NBCOlympics.com and the NBC Sports app. The 2022 Paralympic Winter Games will take place from Friday, March 4 - Sunday, March 13. The 2022 Winter Paralympics will feature a maximum of 736 Paralympians across 78 medal events. In addition to having 39 medal events for men, 35 events for women and 4 mixed events, there will be a maximum of 222 slots available for women. Paralympians will compete across six different Paralympic sports at the 2022 Winter Paralympics --  Alpine Skiing, Biathlon, Cross-Country Skiing, Sled Hockey, Snowboarding and Wheelchair Curling. Five events are on the Alpine Skiing program (Downhill, Super-G, Super Combined, Giant Slalom, Slalom) across three competition categories (standing, sitting and vision-impaired). Athletes combine speed and agility while racing down slopes at speeds of around 100km/h.
The 2022 Winter Paralympics (Chinese: 2022年冬季残疾人奥林匹克运动会; pinyin: 2022 Nián Dōngjì Cánjí Rén Àolínpǐkè Yùndònghuì), commonly known as Beijing 2022 (Chinese: 北京2022), was an international winter multi-sport parasports event held in  Beijing, China from 4 to 13 March 2022.[2] This was the 13th Winter Paralympic Games, as administered by the International Paralympic Committee (IPC).  Beijing was selected as the host city for the 2022 Winter Olympics and Paralympics in 2015 at the 128th IOC Session in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia; taking into account its hosting of the 2008 Summer Paralympics, Beijing is the first city to have hosted both the Summer and Winter Olympics as well as the Summer and Winter Paralympics. This was the overall second Paralympics in China. It was the last of three consecutive Paralympics hosted in East Asia.  These Games featured 564 athletes representing 46 National Paralympic Committees (NPCs), competing in 78 medal events across six sports.
What is the date and location of the 2022 Super Bowl, who will broadcast the game, what is the halftime show, and who are favorites to win? What is the location and date for the Super Bowl in 2022? After Super Bowl LV was held in Tampa Bay, where will the NFL’s flagship event be played in 2022, where will it be broadcast, who is performing the halftime show, and which teams are the favorite to square off? For years, the Super Bowl commences on the first Sunday in February. Yet, because money speaks louder than Stephen A. Smith with a microphone, the NFL expanded their season to 17 games. This pushes the league’s premier product to February 13, the latest in the game’s history. SoFi Stadium gets the nod to host the Super Bowl in 2022. SoFi sits in Inglewood, California, with a capacity of 70,000. However, it’s expandable to slightly over 100,000 for large events, such as a Super Bowl. It was supposed to host Super Bowl LV, but construction delays derailed that plan. Although Los Angeles originally won one of the bids from the cluster made available of LIII, LIV, and LV, they couldn’t host in 2021. The three Super Bowl hosts were chosen from a four-candidate pool. However, with the delay, all four locations got a spot.
Super Bowl 56 is now the only game left in the 2022 NFL playoffs. The AFC and NFC champions have been crowned, and the Bengals will now face the Rams to determine the NFL champion for the 2021 NFL season. The 2022 NFL playoffs proved as unpredictable as the regular season. Wild-card weekend largely went as expected, but after that, chaos reigned. Both of the No. 1 seeds, the Packers and Titans, lost their first game in the divisional round, as all but one of the underdogs won outright. The lone exception was the favored Chiefs, who mounted a game-tying drive with 13 seconds left before winning in overtime. The conference championship games were wild in their own right. Both the Bengals and Rams trailed by double digits in the second half of their wins over the Chiefs and 49ers. They mounted comebacks and as a result, the Bengals will have a chance to win their first Super Bowl in franchise history in their first appearance since 1989. Meanwhile, the Rams will have a chance to avenge their loss against the Patriots in the big game just three years ago. As unpredictable as the playoffs have been, the Super Bowl broadcast, location and date are set in stone. Here's everything you need to know about the big game in 2022, including when Super Bowl 56 will be played.
Advertisement Supported by Carolyn R. Bertozzi, Morten Meldal and K. Barry Sharpless were honored for their advances in “click chemistry,” which has played a role in treating and diagnosing illnesses. By Cora Engelbrecht, Euan Ward and Oliver Whang The 2022 Nobel Prize in Chemistry has been awarded to three scientists whose work harnessed the power of molecular interaction and introduced new, unobtrusive ways of studying the natural world. Carolyn R. Bertozzi of Stanford University, Morten Meldal of the University of Copenhagen and K. Barry Sharpless of Scripps Research will share the prize, which honors the scientists’ independent research that resulted in the development of what is known as click chemistry and bio-orthogonal chemistry. The three researchers will also split a prize of 10 million Swedish kronor, around $900,000. Their works have “led to a revolution in how chemists think about linking molecules together,” said Johan Aqvist, the chair of the Nobel Committee for Chemistry. In winning the award on Wednesday, Dr. Sharpless became only the fifth person to win two Nobels, having received the chemistry prize in 2001 for his work on chirally catalyzed oxidation reactions. The other two-time winners were Marie Curie, John Bardeen, Linus Pauling and Frederick Sanger. Dr.
A 1986 DNA model used by Aziz Sancar, who was awarded the 2015 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.   © Nobel Media. Photo: Alexander Mahmoud  “The said interest shall be divided into five equal parts, which shall be apportioned as follows: /- – -/ one part to the person who shall have made the most important chemical discovery or improvement…”  (Excerpt from the will of Alfred Nobel.) Chemistry was the most important science for Alfred Nobel’s own work. The development of his inventions as well as the industrial processes he employed were based upon chemical knowledge. Chemistry was the second prize area that Nobel mentioned in his will. The Nobel Prize in Chemistry is awarded by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, Stockholm, Sweden. See all chemistry laureates or learn about the nomination process. More facts and figures © Johan Jarnestad/The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences Ill. Niklas Elmehed © Nobel Prize Outreach The Nobel Prize medal. © Nobel Prize Outreach. Photo: Clément Morin. See the full list of prizes and laureates  Model depicting a molecule that chemistry laureate Akira Suzuki successfully created by artificial means.   Photo: Nobel Prize Museum  The Nobel Prize in Chemistry: The development of modern chemistry  Nobel Prizes in organic chemistry 1901-2010  The role of science and technology in future design
Super Bowl LVI[12] was an American football game played to determine the champion of the National Football League (NFL) for the 2021 season. The National Football Conference (NFC) champion Los Angeles Rams defeated the American Football Conference (AFC) champion Cincinnati Bengals, 23–20. The game was played on February 13, 2022, at SoFi Stadium in Inglewood, California, the home stadium of the Rams, marking the second consecutive and second overall Super Bowl with a team playing and winning in its home stadium.[13][14][15][16]  The Rams' victory was their second, first as a Los Angeles-based team, and first since winning 1999's Super Bowl XXXIV when they were based in St. Louis. Finishing with a 12–5 record, the Rams reached their fifth appearance after acquiring veteran quarterback Matthew Stafford, who had not won a playoff game in his previous 12 years with the Detroit Lions. The Bengals, who finished with a 10–7 record, were seeking their first Super Bowl title following several decades of losing seasons and playoff struggles. They won their first playoff game since 1990, ending the longest drought in the four major North American sports, en route to their third Super Bowl appearance and first since 1988's Super Bowl XXIII.
172] Kupp was named the Super Bowl MVP, with eight receptions for 92 yards and two touchdowns, including three receptions and a touchdown (as well as one carry for seven yards) on the Rams final drive.[176][177]  at SoFi Stadium, Inglewood, California  1Completions/attempts2Carries3Long gain4Receptions5Times targeted  Super Bowl LVI featured seven officials. Continuing a practice instituted the previous year an alternate official was assigned for each position of an official on the field and the replay official. The numbers in parentheses below indicate their uniform numbers.[2]  The 2022 Rams finished 5–12, setting the records for the most losses, lowest winning percentage (.294), and longest losing streak (six games) for a defending Super Bowl champion.[183][184] They were also the first defending Super Bowl champion to miss the playoffs since the 2016 Denver Broncos and first to have a losing record since the 2003 Tampa Bay Buccaneers.  The 2022 Bengals tied their franchise-best 12–4 record[a] and clinched the franchise's first consecutive division title. They won a playoff game in consecutive seasons, another franchise first, before being defeated by the eventual Super Bowl LVII champion Kansas City Chiefs in the AFC Championship Game.
The women's 500 m competition in speed skating  at the 2022 Winter Olympics was held on 13 February, at the National Speed Skating Oval ("Ice Ribbon") in Beijing.[1] Erin Jackson of the United States became the Olympic champion, winning her first Olympic medal. She was also the first female Black athlete to medal in speed skating.[2] Miho Takagi of Japan won the silver medal, and Angelina Golikova, representing the Russian Olympic committee, won bronze, also her first Olympic medal.  The defending champion and the Olympic record holder was Nao Kodaira. The 2018 silver medalist, Lee Sang-hwa, retired from competitions. She was still the world record holder during the Olympics. The bronze medalist, Karolína Erbanová, retired as well. Golikova was the 2021 World Single Distances champion at the 500 m  distance. Femke Kok and Olga Fatkulina were the silver and bronze medalist, respectively. Erin Jackson was leading the 2021–22 ISU Speed Skating World Cup at the 500 m distance with eight events completed before the Olympics, followed by Golikova and Kodaira. Golikova skated the season best time, 36.66 in Calgary on 11 December 2021.[3]  Takagi in pair 4 became the early leader with 37.12.
Takagi is the second Japanese athlete to earn a medal in the women's 500m since 1998.  Speed skating returns on Tuesday with the men's and women's team pursuit semifinal and final rounds.  See the full speed skating schedule here. FULL RESULTS REPLAY            Note: Some components of NBCOlympics.com may not be optimized for users browsing with           Internet           Explorer 11, 10 or older browsers or systems.          © 2022 NBC Universal. All rights reserved. Any use, reproduction, modification, distribution, display or performance of this material without NBC Universal’s prior written consent is prohibited. Use of the Website signifies your agreement to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. ©IOC 2022 Official Results powered by Atos. Timing and results management by Omega.
Lost Ark was fully released in South Korea on December 4, 2019, and in North American, South American, and European regions on February 11, 2022, with Amazon Games serving as the global publisher.[16] Users that pre-purchased one of four founder's packs could play 3 days early on February 8, 2022.[17][18][19][20] The game was initially unavailable in Belgium and the Netherlands due to the countries' stringent loot box regulations,[21] with the latter later reversing its decision.[22]  Within twenty-four hours of its release, Lost Ark became the second most played game on Steam.[23][24]  In 2021, there were plans between Smilegate and game publisher HappyTuk [zh] to launch Lost Ark in Taiwan.[25] It was announced in 2023 that the release of Taiwanese servers has been delayed but not canceled.[26]  Lost Ark received "generally favorable" reviews according to review aggregator Metacritic.[27]  PC Magazine praised Lost Ark's combat, writing, "Abilities look good, sound sufficiently powerful, and feel great to use. You can’t help but feel like a combat god when you divekick a crowd, and blast fodder monsters into bloody chunks.
Den of Geek    Ad Lost Ark is one of Steam's biggest hits in a long time, but what time will you be able to play the free-to-play version of the game? Lost Ark is quickly proving to be one of Steam’s biggest hits of 2022, but the game’s complicated release structure has many people wondering what time the red hot title will fully be released and when they’ll be able to join the millions that are already exploring the game that has a lot of people talking.  Originally released (in full) in South Korea in 2019, Lost Ark is an MMORPG with Diablo-like ARPG combat. The game quickly grew a sizeable fanbase in that region thanks to its PvP mechanics, extensive content offerings, cinematic style, and all those other MMO tropes that usually encourage people to gleefully spend a few hundred hours of their lives playing them.  So, while Lost Ark has been playable in South Korea and other regions for quite some time, those in the West who recently pre-ordered any of the Lost Ark Founder’s Pack on Steam were also able to start playing the game yesterday (February 8). You’re still able to start playing the game right now if you decide to buy a Founder’s Pack for the MMO via Steam (each of which comes with a variety of in-game rewards as well as early access to the title).
VTDigger  					News in pursuit of truth				 Stratton-trained Jessie Diggins powered through food poisoning Sunday to win her second medal at the 2022 Beijing Winter Games. The 30-year-old cross-country skier, who snagged bronze in the individual sprint Feb. 8, took silver in the 30-kilometer freestyle race. “It’s really emotional,” she told NBC. “That was one of the hardest things I’ve ever done in my whole life, especially because I had food poisoning 30 hours ago, which is why I thought I was going to die at the finish line. My legs were cramping the whole last 17 kilometers. I don’t know how I made it.” With her victory, Diggins, who won gold in the 2018 women’s team sprint, now owns an Olympic medal in every color. “It’s been an emotional roller-coaster, but I am so happy we made it to the end,” Diggins told reporters. “To have a medal in the sprint and the 30K are the ultimate bookends for me. I have been trying to be a good all-round athlete my whole life, so this has been really cool.” Diggins finished the final cross-country race of the Beijing Olympics in 1 hour 26 minutes 37 seconds, less than two minutes behind Therese Johaug of Norway and 50 seconds ahead of third-place finisher Kerttu Niskanen of Finland.
20: Diggins wins her second 2022 Olympic medal. About us Request a correction Submit a tip  							VTDigger's Brattleboro reporter.							 							More by Kevin O'Connor
The Endgame is an American crime drama thriller television series that premiered on NBC on February 21, 2022. The series is created by Nicholas Wootton and Jake Coburn.[1][2] In May 2022, the series was canceled after one season.[3]  In this heist drama, criminal mastermind Elena Federova squares off against principled FBI agent Val Turner.[4]  On April 21, 2021, The Untitled Nick Wootton/Jake Coburn Project was given a pilot order by NBC. It was created by Nicholas Wootton and Jake Coburn who were expected to executive produce alongside Julie Plec and Emily Cummins. Wootton also wrote the pilot.[5] On September 21, 2021, NBC ordered The Endgame to series. Justin Lin and Andrew Schneider were added as executive producers. Lin also directed the pilot. Universal Television, Nicholas Wootton Productions, Jake Coburn Productions, Inc., My So-Called Company, and Perfect Storm Entertainment are the production companies involved with producing the series.[1] Upon the series order, Morena Baccarin, Ryan Michelle Bathé, Kamal Angelo Bolden, Costa Ronin, Noah Bean, Jordan Johnson-Hinds, and Mark D. Espinoza were cast in starring roles.[6] On November 18, 2021, Karl Josef Co and Massiel Mordan were added to the cast.
Those who enjoy the cat and mouse thriller The Endgame will be glad to know that there are a number of other similar television shows. The thriller genre is one that has been experiencing a bit of a golden age, and it seems that almost every network wants to have one of its own. It’s actually easy to see why the genre would continue to maintain its popularity. RELATED: 10 Thriller Movies With The Best Re-Watch Value More than almost any other genre, it aims to keep the audience on the edge of their seat, constantly wondering just what’s going to happen and how the mystery (or mysteries) will ultimately be resolved. The Endgame is the newest thriller to grace NBC, and it joins a large number of similar series, both on that network and elsewhere. There is much about The Blacklist that will appeal to those who also enjoyed The Endgame. Most notably, there is the central conflict between its two main characters, Raymond Reddington and Elizabeth Keene. It’s a densely woven series, with a number of enigmas and mysteries that it constantly keeps in the air. There’s no denying, though, that a major part of its appeal stems from James Spader’s scenery-chewing performance as the enigmatic yet compelling Reddington, and it remains one of his best roles. American popular culture has an enduring fascination with the figure of the drug lord, and there are few drug lords who are as renowned as Pablo Escobar.
He falsely claimed they had been "been facing humiliation and genocide perpetrated by the Kyiv regime".[74] Putin also falsely claimed that Ukraine's government were neo-Nazis under Western control, that Ukraine was developing nuclear weapons, and that NATO was building up military infrastructure in Ukraine to threaten Russia.[75] He said Russia sought the "demilitarisation and denazification" of Ukraine.[76] Putin said he had no plans to occupy Ukraine and supported the right of the Ukrainian people to self-determination.[75] Within minutes of Putin's announcement, Russian missiles struck targets throughout Ukraine,[77] and Russian troops invaded from the north, east and south.[78] Later an alleged report from Russia's Federal Security Service (FSB) was leaked, claiming that the intelligence agency had not been aware of Putin's plan to invade Ukraine.[79]  The invasion began at dawn on 24 February,[72] with infantry divisions and armoured and air support in Eastern Ukraine, and dozens of missile attacks across Ukraine,[80][81] which reached as far west as Lviv.[82][83] The first fighting took place in Luhansk Oblast near Milove village on the border with Russia at 3:40 a.m. Kyiv time.
(GRIGORY SYSOYEV/AFP/Getty Images) Early in 2021, Zelenskyy cracked down on pro-Russian Ukrainian oligarchs, including Viktor Medvedchuk, a close friend of Putin. Subsequently, Putin deploys increasing numbers of troops near the Ukrainian border and publishes an article claiming that Russians and Ukrainians are “one people.” By December, tens of thousands of Russian troops are deployed to the borders and Putin issues demands to NATO and the United States. Among these demands is that Ukraine never be admitted to NATO – a request rejected by the Biden administration.  (Vadim Ghirda/AP) In 2014, the Ukrainian regions of Donetsk and Luhansk broke away from Ukraine, under the leadership of what the Ukrainian government considered to be Russian-backed terrorists. Following the breakdown of relations with NATO and the West in late February, Putin recognized these territories as independent states and sent troops in to “keep the peace.” (Emilio Morenatti/AP) Days after recognizing the breakaway territories, Russia launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine. The invasion began in the eastern Ukrainian territory of Donbas. Zelenskyy declared martial law in Ukraine and officially broke diplomatic ties with Russia. Putin’s actions were condemned across the world and within Russia. The Associated Press After months of Russian encroachment, Ukrainian forces pushed the Russian military back, reclaiming over a thousand square miles.
“What this represented in them is this sort of golden light, or this golden aura, that’s specifically shown in their eyes. And this symbolises the blessing or the grace of the Erdtree. However, after a time, there were some individuals who lost this grace, and the light faded from their eyes. And these are what are known as the Tarnished.” The Tarnished were banished and exiled from the game’s world many years prior to when you – the player – will enter it. Since their ex-communication, the eponymous Elden Ring has of course been shattered and now the Tarnished are being summoned back to The Lands Between. So what are you waiting for? Get pre-ordering and we’ll see you on the other side… Elden Ring is released on February 25, 2022, hitting PS4, PS5, Xbox One, Xbox Series X, and PC. Keep an eye here for more updates. The world’s defining voice in music and pop culture: breaking what’s new and what’s next since 1952.      When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission.         © 2023 NME is part of NME Networks.
Elden Ring was pitched at that year’s E3 as FromSoftware’s “largest game to-date,” and is said to be set in a “sprawling realm steeped in a rich and bloody history” crafted by Dark Souls creator Hidetaka Miyazaki and Game of Thrones creator George R.R. Martin. Miyazaki has said that Elden Ring will be “full of things that we weren’t able to do in the Dark Souls series.” The game will focus “more heavily on RPG elements,” Miyazaki said in an interview from 2019, and “will include a wide variety of weapons, magic, and ways to engage enemies, that make it possible to provide users with a style of gameplay and strategy that suits them.” FromSoftware fans have since been wracked with Elden Ring-information withdrawal, leading the community to fill the void with its own, self-created lore. Elden Ring is coming to PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Windows PC, Xbox One, and Xbox Series X next year. A weekly roundup of the best things from Polygon Please check your email to find a confirmation email, and follow the steps to confirm your humanity. Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again. Please check your email to find a confirmation email, and follow the steps to confirm your humanity. Oops. Something went wrong. Please enter a valid email and try again.
3: Top 10 players Swiatek defeated en route to her first title of the season in Doha. The win is the second WTA 1000 title of her career.  0: Wins for Swiatek against Maria Sakkari (0-3) and Aryna Sabalenka (0-1) going into Doha. After beating them in back-to-back matches in Doha, she has not lost to either player since. 1: Set lost by Swiatek in Doha, which came to Viktorija Golubic in the first round.  2: Games lost in the final against Anett Kontaveit.   Champions Corner: Swiatek's 'surreal' Indian Wells 20: Wins for Swiatek in 2022 after defeating Maria Sakkari 6-4, 6-1 in the final, the most on tour.  2: Swiatek's new career-high ranking after winning her second-straight WTA 1000 title. 3: Comebacks from a set down for Swiatek in Indian Wells, doing so to beat Anhelina Kalinina, Clara Tauson and Angelique Kerber in her first three matches. She has had seven such comebacks in 2022. Prior to this season, she had just eight in her career.  11: Consecutive wins for Swiatek, tying then No.
The defending champion needed just 53 minutes to advance, 6-0, 6-1, on Wednesday at the Qatar TotalEnergies Open.ByTENNIS.comPublished Feb 15, 2023 copy_link Published Feb 15, 2023 Iga Swiatek returned to the site where her masterful rise in 2022 began with a 37-match win streak. And what a statement the world No. 1 made at the Qatar TotalEnergies Open in Doha Wednesday.On paper, Swiatek’s opening match presented intrigue. Across the net was Danielle Collins, one of the nine players to defeat the Pole during a banner 2022 season that saw her win eight titles and completely own her status as the 28th world No. 1 in WTA history.In reality, today's show was a solo act. Swiatek completely silenced Collins, serving up another bakery special with a 6-0, 6-1 victory."I'm happy that I was kind of composed and from the beginning till the end pretty focused and disciplined with tactics. So I didn't really let Danielle get into the rhythm," Swiatek told press. "I wanted to be aggressive. I'm pretty happy that I did that well." On paper, Swiatek’s opening match presented intrigue.
Published on 2/21/2022 at 11:04 AM The 2022 Beijing Winter Olympics have ended after over two weeks of some dramatic, inspiring, and comedic moments. The medals given out during these games were are made up of five rings and a center and are called "Tong Xin," which means "together as one." Unlike during the summer games in Tokyo just last year, the top gold medal winner of the winter games is not the most expected. Instead, the biggest gold medal winner of the 2022 Olympics is Norway. Overall, the nation took home significantly more medals than its competitors. Here's the breakdown of the five countries that won the biggest. Gold: 16Silver: 8Bronze: 13Total: 37 Gold: 6Silver: 12Bronze: 14Total: 32 Gold: 12Silver: 10Bronze: 5Total: 27 Gold: 4Silver: 8Bronze: 14Total: 26 Gold: 8Silver: 10Bronze: 7Total: 25 When it came to which countries won the most medals overall, Norway came in first. The Russian Olympic Committee (the unofficial team representing Russia's athletes) came in second with 32 medals. In third place was Germany, with 27 medals. Canada was next with 26 medals, and the US trailed behind with 25 medals.
The 32 medals won by Russian athletes mark the most medals ever won by Russian athletes in on Winter Olympics, regardless of representation. Host-nation China delivered its best Winter Olympics performance, scoring the third-most gold medals (9) but ranking 11th with 15 total medals. The nation's previous best total was 11 total medals, reached in both 2006 and 2010. For the United States, Nathan Chen, Jessie Diggins, Lindsey Jacobellis, Elana Meyers Taylor, and Madison Hubbell and Zach Donohue all secured multiple medals. Jacobellis is the only athlete to win two gold medals.  After PyeongChang saw a Winter Olympics-record 30 different National Olympic Committees win medals, 29 different NOCs claimed at least one medal in Beijing. We've come a long way since the inaugural Winter Olympics in 1924, when 16 events across six sports were decided in Chamonix, France. *It should be noted that ROC's gold medal in the team figure skating event is provisional and dependent upon the adjudication of Kamila Valieva's doping case. The U.S. finished second with Japan in third and Canada in fourth.             Note: Some components of NBCOlympics.com may not be optimized for users browsing with           Internet           Explorer 11, 10 or older browsers or systems.          © 2022 NBC Universal. All rights reserved.
Chris Stapleton won the trophy for Male Vocalist of the Year at the 2022 CMA Awards, beating out fellow nominees Eric Church, Luke Combs, Cody Johnson and Morgan Wallen.  Visibly moved by the win, Stapleton used the opportunity to share his appreciation with those who have supported his career through the years. "This is a dream every minute we get to live this," he told the crowd during his acceptance speech. "I'm evidence that dreams come true all the time, so thank you, thank you to everybody." Stapleton's Wednesday night win marks the second consecutive year that he has won the Male Vocalist of the Year trophy, and his sixth win in the category overall. From 2015 to 2018, the singer had a hot streak as Male Vocalist, but Combs toppled his reign for two years in 2019 and 2020. Still, in 2022, Stapleton's steady traditionalism and consistency as a live act won the day. Together with his All-American Road Show, the singer has been one of country music's most prolific and reliable touring acts this year, and he is even the subject of a current Country Music Hall of Fame exhibit. Early in the year, he won three Grammy Awards, including Best Country Album for his late 2020 project, Starting Over. The 2022 CMA Awards aired live from Nashville's Bridgestone Arena on ABC.
And the 2022 CMA Award goes to ...? The 56th annual CMA Awards take place Wednesday inside Nashville's Bridgestone Arena, where "Country Girl" singer Luke Bryan co-hosts with NFL legend Peyton Manning. The star-filled night includes performances from Luke Combs, Miranda Lambert, Elle King with the Black Keys, Thomas Rhett and Katy Perry, Cody Johnson, Carly Pearce, Carrie Underwood and more. Top CMA Awards highlights:Six unforgettable moments from country music's biggest night The show kicked off at 7 p.m. CST on ABC. More:CMA Awards 2022: Viral clogger Zeb Ross crashes Peyton Manning and Luke Bryan's monologue From heavy-hitting country music hitmakers competing for Entertainer of the Year to newcomers looking for a breakout moment, we've got you covered with a list of winners and nominees for this year's so-called "biggest night" in country music — include a pair of honorees named hours before the show via ABC's "Good Morning America." Carly Pearce and Ashley McBryde won Musical Event of the Year for chart-topping duet "Never Wanted To Be That Girl," "GMA" correspondent Will Reeve announced early Wednesday during a free Keith Urban performance outside Bridgestone Arena.
The 2022 ACC men's basketball tournament (officially the 2022 New York Life ACC Men's Basketball Tournament, for sponsorship reasons) was the postseason men's basketball tournament for the 2021–22 Atlantic Coast Conference men's basketball season. It was held at the Barclays Center in Brooklyn, New York, during March 8–12, 2022.[1] The 2022 tournament was the 69th annual edition of the tournament. The Virginia Tech Hokies won the tournament, their first ACC Tournament title and only their second conference tournament title in program history, receiving the conference's automatic bid to the 2022 NCAA tournament. The Hokies were the second ACC champion to win four tournament games to secure the title and were the lowest overall seed to win the title.[2]  All 15 ACC teams participate in the tournament.  Teams were seeded by conference record, with a tiebreaker system to seed teams that finished with identical conference records.[3] Duke secured the regular season title and the first overall seed.  Notre Dame, North Carolina, and Miami were the other teams to secure double-byes.[4]  ‡ – ACC Regular Season Champions.† – Received a double-bye in the conference tournament.# – Received a single-bye in the conference tournament.  * – Denotes overtime period  Tournament MVP: Hunter Cattoor, Virginia Tech  All-Tournament Teams:[5]
The 2022 ACC Championship Game was a college football conference championship game that was played on December 3, 2022, at Bank of America Stadium in Charlotte, North Carolina to determine the champion of the Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC) for the 2022 season. The game featured the Clemson Tigers, the champion of the Atlantic Division, and the North Carolina Tar Heels, the champion of the Coastal Division. The 18th annual ACC Championship Game, the contest began at 8:00 p.m. EST and aired on ABC.[1] Sponsored by restaurant chain Subway, the game was officially known as the Subway ACC Championship Game.  The 2022 ACC Championship Game featured the Clemson Tigers, champions of the Atlantic Division, and the North Carolina Tar Heels, champions of the Coastal Division. The last time these two teams met in the ACC Championship Game was in 2015, where the Tigers beat the Tar Heels 45-37.  The Tigers clinched a spot in the game as the champion of the ACC's Atlantic Division following Pittsburgh's defeat of Syracuse on November 5.[2]  The Tar Heels clinched a spot in the game as the champion of the ACC's Coastal Division following their defeat of Wake Forest on November 12.[3]  at Bank of America Stadium • Charlotte, North Carolina  No Scoring
Apple started taking pre-orders on September 9, with general availability from September 16 for the iPhone 14 and October 7 for the iPhone 14 Plus.[22]  The iPhone 14 and iPhone 14 Plus have an identical design to the iPhone 13, although the US models lack a physical SIM tray.  The iPhone 14 and iPhone 14 Plus are available in six colors: Blue, Purple, Midnight, Starlight, Yellow, and Product Red.[24] Purple is a new color replacing Pink used on the iPhone 13 and iPhone 13 Mini. The yellow option was added on March 7, 2023.[25]  iPhone 14 and 14 Plus are available in three internal storage configurations: 128, 256, and 512 GB. Both models have 6 GB of RAM, an increase over the previous iPhone 13 and 13 mini models' 4 GB of RAM. The iPhone 14 and 14 Plus have the same IP68 rating for dust and water resistance as their predecessors.[6]  The iPhone 14 and 14 Plus use a 5-nanometer Apple-designed system on a chip, the A15 Bionic, while the iPhone 14 Pro and 14 Pro Max have a faster A16 Bionic.[26][27]  The iPhone 14's A15 chip has a 6-core CPU, 5-core GPU, and a 16-core Neural Engine.
Learn how to identify your iPhone model by its model number and other details. Learn how to find the model number of your iPhone. Then find the model number in the list below.   Year introduced: 2022 Capacity: 128 GB, 256 GB, 512 GB, 1 TB Colors: Silver, gold, space black, deep purple Model numbers: A2651 (United States, Puerto Rico), A2893 (Canada, Guam, Japan, Mexico, Saudi Arabia, and U.S. Virgin Islands), A2896  (China mainland, Hong Kong, Macao), A2895 (Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia), A2894 (other countries and regions) Details: iPhone 14 Pro Max has a 6.7-inch1 all-screen Super Retina XDR display. The back is premium matte glass, and there's a flat-edge stainless steel band around the frame. The side button is on the right side of the device. There are three cameras on the back: Ultra Wide, Main, and Telephoto. There's a LiDAR Scanner on the back. There's an LED True Tone flash on the back. In the United States, there is no SIM tray.
Google has released the Google I/O 2022 schedule, giving us a brief overview of what to expect. Read on to know more. We’re just two weeks away from Google I/O 2022. While the yearly event is primarily targeted at developers, there will be plenty of fun stuff for enthusiasts and the general public. Google usually doesn’t reveal much about what it plans to announce at the event. However, the company has now released the Google I/O 2022 schedule, giving us a brief overview of what to expect. Google I/O 2022 will be held on May 11 and May 12 at the Shoreline Amphitheater. The event will kick off with Sundar Pichai’s “Google I/O keynote” at 10 AM. This will be the main attraction for the general population as the main event tends to be more consumer-focused. While the event’s description doesn’t provide specifics, expect to see announcements for popular Google services, Workspace, privacy, health, and Google’s other new projects and endeavors. Also, keep an eye out for potential hardware announcements in the form of the Pixel 6a, Pixel Watch, and smart home devices. The main keynote will be followed by the Developer keynote and “What’s new in Android.” This is where we expect to learn more about Android 13, Wear OS, and updates to developer products and tools. Google says the schedule is slightly different this year.
Google I/O 2023 was broadcast online and featured announcements on everything from Pixel Fold to Bard. Here's what you need to know. Google I/O is the biggest annual event for developers and consumers who are interested in the latest innovations from Google. The conference is where Google typically unveils new products and services and provides a sneak peek at what's coming. This year's show was held on 10 May 2023 as a hybrid event with a limited live audience and online access for everyone. Here's everything you need to know about Google I/O 2023. Google I/O is an annual developer conference hosted by Google, where the company showcases its latest technologies and products. The conference typically features keynote speeches, technical sessions, and product announcements, and attracts both developers and consumers. Google announced Google I/O 2023 through a blog post on the official Google Developers website in March. The post revealed the dates and format of the event and invited interested attendees to register for the event. The announcement was also shared on Google's social media channels. Like previous years, Google also teased the event with a binary field puzzle that fans had to solve to reveal the launch date. Googgle I/O 20213 took place on 10 May. The keynote occurred at 10am PT and lasted about two hours. Google I/O 2023 was broadcast online and is still available to everyone to watch. We embedded the livestream at the top of this page - just hit play.
Netflix to Develop Film Adaptation of Irredeemable and Incorruptible Graphic Novel Series with The Harder They Fall Director Jeymes Samuel & Academy Award-Nominated Screenwriter Kemp Powers  BAFTA Film Award winner Jeymes Samuel (The Harder They Fall) is set to direct a film adaptation of the BOOM! Studios’ graphic novel series Irredeemable and its spin-off Incorruptible for Netflix. Academy Award nominated Kemp Powers (writer of One Night in Miami and Soul and director of the upcoming Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse (Part One) with Joaquim Dos Santos & Justin Thompson) will pen the adaptation, which will have the protagonists from each series – one a villain on a quest to become a superhero, and the other a fallen hero turned villain – face off. The film will be produced by Shawn Carter, James Lassiter, and Stephen Christy & Ross Richie for BOOM! Studios. Kemp Powers and Adam Yoelin are executive producers on the film. Mette Norkjaer will oversee the project for BOOM! Studios. When the world’s most powerful and beloved superhero, the god-like Plutonian, inexplicably begins slaughtering everyone on Earth, the only person that can stop him is his former arch-nemesis, the super-powered villain Max Damage.
“The Big Short” filmmaker attached to oversee project for Fox’s new Boom! Comics cinematic universe Adam McKay has been attached to direct “Irredeemable” for 20th Century Fox, TheWrap has learned. The film is based on the Boom! Comics book of the same name and would help kick off Fox’s brand-new superhero cinematic universe. The “Anchorman” and “Big Short” director will be working with Tommy Wirkola (“Hansel and Gretel: Witch Hunters”), who is writing the screenplay.  In the comics, “Irredeemable” follows superhero-turned-villain, the Plutonian, as he goes on a killing rampage. It’s up to the superhero group The Paradigm to stop him.
39][40] Tianwen-1's rover is named Zhurong (Chinese: 祝融号), after a Chinese mytho-historical figure usually associated with fire and light.[41] The name was chosen through an online poll held from January to February 2021.[42]  China's Mars program started in partnership with Russia. In November 2011, the Russian spacecraft Fobos-Grunt, destined for Mars and Phobos, was launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome. The Russian spacecraft carried with it an attached secondary spacecraft, the Yinghuo-1, which was intended to become China's first Mars orbiter (Fobos-Grunt also carried experiments from the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences and the American Planetary Society). However, Fobos-Grunt's main propulsion unit failed to boost the Mars-bound stack from its initial Earth parking orbit and the combined multinational spacecraft and experiments eventually reentered the atmosphere of Earth in January 2012.[citation needed] In 2014, China subsequently began an independent Mars project.[43]  The new Mars spacecraft, consisting of an orbiter and a lander with an attached rover, was developed by the China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation (CASC) and is managed by the National Space Science Centre (NSSC) in Beijing.[44] The mission was formally approved in 2016.[45]
On December 31, 2021, the Tianwen-1 orbiter deployed a second deployable camera (TDC-2) into Mars orbit which captured photographs of the Tianwen-1 in orbit to celebrate its achievement of the year[20] and a selfie stick payload was deployed to its working position on orbiter to take images of the orbiter's components and Chinese flag on 30 January 2022 to celebrate the Chinese New Year. In September 2022, the mission was awarded the World Space Award by the International Astronautical Federation.[35][36]  The Tianwen-1 mission was the second of three Martian exploration missions launched during the July 2020 window, after the United Arab Emirates Space Agency's Hope orbiter, and before NASA's Mars 2020 mission, which landed the Perseverance rover with the attached Ingenuity helicopter drone.[37]  China's planetary exploration program is officially dubbed the "Tianwen Series". "Tianwen-1" (Chinese: 天问一号)  is the program's first mission, and subsequent planetary missions will be numbered sequentially.[38] The name Tianwen means "questions to heaven" or "quest for heavenly truth", from the same classical poem written by Qu Yuan (c. 340–278 BC), an ancient Chinese poet.
Shad Gaspard has been posthumously named the recipient of the 2022 Warrior Award. Named after WWE Hall of Famer The Ultimate Warrior, The Warrior Award is presented to an individual who has exhibited unwavering strength and perseverance and who lives life with the courage and compassion that embodies the indomitable spirit of The Ultimate Warrior. The news was first reported by Foxsports.com. The Warrior Award presentation will be part of the WWE Hall of Fame Induction Ceremony, Friday, April 1, at American Airlines Center in Dallas as part of WrestleMania Week. The event will stream live exclusively on Peacock in the U.S. and WWE Network everywhere else. A larger-than-life Superstar with boundless charisma, Shad passed away on May 17, 2020. While swimming with his son, the pair got caught in a strong current in Venice Beach, Cal. In a heroic act of love, the concerned father instructed lifeguards to save his son before himself and disappeared soon after. Days later, his passing was confirmed. He was 39 years old. Shad’s bravery and selflessness will be honored next Friday with the 2022 Warrior Award as part of the 2022 WWE Hall of Fame Induction Ceremony. WWE Global Ambassador Titus O’Neil has been named the recipient of the 2020 Warrior Award.  Longtime WWE employee Rich Hering has been named the recipient of the 2021 Warrior Award.
Also nominated for the Mighty Warrior Award: Josie Brence (Women's Soccer), Juliana Brown/Purnell (Women's Track & Field), Tyra Ching (Beach Volleyball), Andrew Classen (Men's Golf), Holly Golenor (Women's Basketball), Lindsay Janzer (Women's Cross Country), Reece Van Lierop (Men's Basketball), Nate Martin (Baseball), Samantha Martinez (Softball), Quinn McCallion (Men's Soccer), Zander Moha (Men's Cross Country), Meredith Pinkerton (Women's Lacrosse), Ally Schmidt/Tow (Volleyball), Jesse Squires (Men's Track & Field), and Tyson Stover (Men's Wrestling). The student-athlete selected for The Mark Neustel Scholarship Award and the Corban Athletics Team GPA Award will both be announced later next week.   A summary of every award winner from the 2023 Golden Warrior Awards can be found below: Male Newcomer of the Year: Evan Olson, Men's Track & Field Female Newcomer of the Year: Makayla Roginski, Volleyball Unsung Hero Award: Samantha Martinez, Softball Breakthrough Athlete of the Year: Megan Dennis, Beach Volleyball Individual Performance of the Year: Makida Herbert, Women's Soccer Comeback of the Year: David Rubio vs No.
2x7.6x0.7 inchesWEIGHT: 2.45 pounds LEARN MORE: Make the right decision when making purchasing decisions. Unlike most other computing devices, the Microsoft Surface Laptop SE is designed to be fully accessible for onsite repairs of common components, so students likely won’t have to wait to get back to work if their SE breaks. With no moving parts and a strong chassis, the Microsoft Surface Laptop SE is about as tough as a laptop can be without adding specifically ruggedized components. And while elementary education is hardly a war zone, younger students likely don’t treat their devices with as much care as adults. Microsoft talked with school administrators, teachers and IT professionals working with students ranging in age from kindergarten to eighth grade. It quickly became apparent that three key items — the screen, keyboard and battery — were the most commonly damaged or broken components on classroom laptops, especially in devices that also went home with students. Those three components made up 85 percent of all repair orders, and the repair process itself was also a detriment to education. Normally, broken units must be shipped to a factory or repair center that might take a week or longer to ship the device back — meaning broken laptops were not available to students for extended periods. The shipping costs also were often the responsibility of the school. Microsoft has revolutionized that process with the Microsoft Surface Laptop SE.
Note: Some products might not be available in your country or region.   Software  Windows 8 Pro. Upgradeable to Windows 8.1 Pro  Exterior  Dimensions: 10.81 in (27.5 cm) x 6.81 in (17.3 cm) x 0.53 in (13.46 mm)  Weight: Less than 2lbs Casing: VaporMg Color: Dark Titanium Integrated kickstand Physical buttons: Volume, Power, and Windows button  Storage* and Memory  64GB, 128GB  Display  Screen: 10.6 inch ClearType Full HD Display Resolution: 1920 x 1080 Aspect Ratio: 16:9 (widescreen) Touch: 10-point multi-touch  CPU and Wireless  3rd Gen Intel Core i5 Processor  4GB RAM Wi-Fi (802.11a/b/g/n)Bluetooth®4.0 technology  Battery Life  42 W-h  Camera, Video, and Audio  Two 720p HD cameras, front and rear-facing Microphone Stereo speakers  Ports  Full-size USB 3.0 microSDXC card slot Headset jack Mini DisplayPort Cover port  Sensors  Ambient light sensor Accelerometer Gyroscope Magnetometer  Power Supply  48W power supply (including 5W USB for accessory charging)  Surface Pro Pen  Included   * System software uses significant storage space.
The Lost City features Sandra Bullock, Channing Tatum, and Daniel Radcliffe, among a few other actors. Check out some fun facts about the cast. The 2022 film The Lost City is the perfect combination of comedy, adventure, romance, and an incredibly talented cast capable of pulling off any role. This film directed by Adam and Aaron Nee, from a story by Seth Gordon, features Loretta Sage, a brilliant author who writes romance novels set in exotic locations featuring Dr. Angela Lovemore and her romantic interest, Dash McMahon. But Loretta's real life bears no resemblance to the things she writes: after her husband's death, she became a reclusive, grumpy woman who is not even eager to write anymore. Halfway through a promotional tour for her latest novel, Loretta is kidnapped by a lunatic billionaire who wants her to lead him to a lost city treasure she depicted in her book. Fortunately, Loretta won't be alone: Alan, the cover model of her books, sets out on a journey to rescue her and demonstrate that he can also be a hero. Sandra Bullock and Channing Tatum headline this blockbuster alongside Daniel Radcliffe, Da'Vine Joy Randolph, Brad Pitt, and Oscar Nunez, among other actors. The Lost City was released in March 2022 and quickly became a box office hit.
The Lost City's cast going full throttle on themselves must be seen to be believed, so please — if you're going to use your free trial of Paramount+, do it in time to watch a smart lady, a himbo, a basket case, and Brad Pitt go hog wild on the roles they were born to play. The Lost City is now playing in theaters and streaming on Paramount+.  More in Streaming  Alexis Nedd is a senior entertainment reporter at Mashable. A self-named "fanthropologist," she's a fantasy, sci-fi, and superhero nerd with a penchant for pop cultural analysis. Her work has previously appeared in BuzzFeed, Cosmopolitan, Elle, and Esquire.
Filed under: What the American Oscars telecast cut from the Will Smith-Chris Rock confrontation. Will Smith has been banned from the Oscars for 10 years after slapping Chris Rock live on camera during the award show, the New York Times reports. The incident came in the final hour of an otherwise sleepy Oscars telecast on March 27. Rock made a joke about Smith’s wife, Jada Pinkett Smith, and Smith took the stage and slapped him. Minutes later, Smith won his first ever Oscar. “I did not know this was gonna be the most exciting Oscars ever,” marveled Diddy shortly after. “This action we are taking today in response to Will Smith’s behavior is a step toward a larger goal of protecting the safety of our performers and guests, and restoring trust in the Academy,” the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences said in an open letter on April 8. “We also hope this can begin a time of healing and restoration for all involved and impacted.” Smith, who resigned from the Academy on April 1, said in a statement, “I accept and respect the Academy’s decision.” Here’s what happened. Chris Rock was appearing at the Oscars to announce the winner for Best Documentary. In the leadup to announcing the nominees, he went through a little comedic patter about some of the nominees, and his attention appeared to snag on Smith’s wife, Jada Pinkett Smith, sitting in front in a green gown with a shaved head.
After the show, the Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences issued a statement saying it “does not condone violence of any form.” The Los Angeles Police Department said in a statement that it was aware of the incident. “The incident involved one individual slapping another,” the statement read. “The individual involved has declined to file a police report. If the involved party desires a police report at a later date, LAPD will be available to complete an investigative report.” “That was the greatest night in the history of television,” Rock said before resuming his role as presenter. A few minutes later, rapper Sean Combs — on stage to introduce a tribute to “The Godfather” — tried to play peacemaker and suggested Smith and Rock settle their differences at an Oscars afterparty. “Will and Chris, we’re going to solve that like family at the Gold party,” Combs said. The reverberations did not stop there. Several people approached Smith and Pinkett Smith in the commercial breaks that followed; Keith Urban hugged Smith during one stoppage in the show, and Nicole Kidman also went over to say a few words as well. Backstage, during interview sessions with winners, the Rock-Smith incident seemed like something few — if anyone — wanted to discuss. “I’m not talking about that,” said Ahmir “Questlove” Thompson, the director of “Summer of Soul,” which won an Oscar for best documentary. The confrontation overshadowed Smith’s milestone accomplishment.
Apple M2 is a series of ARM-based system on a chip (SoC) designed by Apple Inc. as a central processing unit (CPU) and graphics processing unit (GPU) for its Mac desktops and notebooks, and the iPad Pro tablet. It is the second generation of ARM architecture intended for Apple's Mac computers after switching from Intel Core to Apple silicon, succeeding the M1. Apple announced the M2 on June 6, 2022, at WWDC, along with models of the MacBook Air and the 13-inch MacBook Pro using the M2. The M2 is made with TSMC's "Enhanced 5-nanometer technology" N5P process and contains 20 billion transistors, a 25% increase from the M1. Apple claims CPU improvements up to 18% and GPU improvements up to 35% compared to the M1.[3]  The M2 was followed by the professional-focused M2 Pro and M2 Max chips in January 2023. The M2 Max is a higher-powered version of the M2 Pro, with more GPU cores and memory bandwidth, and a larger die size.[4] Apple introduced the M2 Ultra in June 2023, combining two M2 Max chips in one package.[1]
Apple in June 2022 unveiled the M2, its next-generation Apple silicon chip that followed the M1 chip. This guide highlights everything you need to know about the M2 chip, from performance improvements to extra features.    The M2 is Apple's next-generation System on a Chip (SoC) developed for use in Macs and iPads. It marks Apple's continued work to transition away from the Intel chips that were used in Macs up until 2020. As a "System on a Chip," the M2 integrates several different components, including the CPU, GPU, unified memory architecture (RAM), Neural Engine, Secure Enclave, SSD controller, image signal processor, encode/decode engines, Thunderbolt controller with USB 4 support, and more, all of which power the different features in the Mac. Before Apple silicon, Macs used multiple chips for CPU, I/O, and security, but Apple's effort to integrate these chips is the reason why the M2 is much faster and more efficient than Intel chips. The unified memory architecture that Apple has included is also a major factor because all of the technologies in the M2 are able to access the same data without having to swap between multiple pools of memory. Built into the M2 chip, the unified memory architecture means the CPU, GPU, and other processor components don't need to copy data between one another, and are able to access the same data pool.
CODA is the Oscars 2022 Best Picture Oscar winner! Ten films competed to take home the most prestigious award in film, the Oscar, with the winner revealed when The Oscars aired LIVE SUNDAY, MARCH 27 on ABC. The nominees for Best Picture were: BELFAST, CODA, DON'T LOOK UP, DRIVE MY CAR, DUNE, KING RICHARD, LICORICE PIZZA, NIGHTMARE ALLEY, THE POWER OF THE DOG and WEST SIDE STORY. THE POWER OF THE DOG had the most nominations, having been nominated for 12 Academy Awards. NIGHTMARE ALLEY was the fourth Best Picture nomination for Bradley Cooper, having previously been nominated for AMERICAN SNIPER (2014), A STAR IS BORN (2018) and JOKER (2019). WEST SIDE STORY was Steven Spielberg's 11th Best Picture nomination, which is a record for an individual producer. For all the details, you can read more about the Oscars 2022 Best Picture nominees below. You can also explore other Oscars 2022 nominees and see the complete Oscars 2022 nominations list right here on Oscar.com.
Two years later, Kafuku, still unable to fully cope with the loss of his wife, receives an offer to direct a play at a theater festival and drives to Hiroshima.      DUNE  Mary Parent, Denis Villeneuve and Cale Boyter, Producers  Film Synopsis  Paul Atreides, a young man haunted by prophetic dreams and fated for greatness, is the son of a brave ruler and a warrior priestess. When his family is placed in charge of the desert planet Arrakis, Paul must defend his family's stewardship of the world's most valued resource.      RELATED: Oscars 2022 Shortlists in 10 Award Categories Announced      KING RICHARD  Tim White, Trevor White and Will Smith, Producers  Film Synopsis  Armed with a brazen plan, Richard Williams is determined to write his daughters into history. Along with his wife Oracene, Richard guides their young daughters, Venus and Serena, on their path to changing the sport of tennis and the world forever.      LICORICE PIZZA  Sara Murphy, Adam Somner and Paul Thomas Anderson, Producers  Film Synopsis  Fifteen-year-old Gary Valentine, at the tail end of his career as a child actor, instantly falls in love with twenty-something photographer's assistant Alana Kane.
Kong" "The Matrix Resurrections" "No Time to Die" "Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings" "Spider-Man: No Way Home"  Download    Nominations voting begins on Thursday, January 27, 2022, and concludes on Tuesday, February 1, 2022.  Nominations for the 94th Academy Awards will be announced on Tuesday, February 8, 2022.  The 94th Oscars® will be held on Sunday, March 27, 2022, at the Dolby® Theatre at Hollywood & Highland® in Hollywood and will be televised live on ABC and in more than 200 territories worldwide.    FOLLOW THE ACADEMYwww.oscars.orgwww.facebook.com/TheAcademywww.youtube.com/Oscarswww.twitter.com/TheAcademywww.instagram.
The 95th annual Oscars will be held on March 12, 2023, in Los Angeles.    Credit: ABC/Jeff Lipsky							  						 Kimmel is returning to host for the third time. He previously helmed the 2017 and 2018 awards.    Kimmel is returning to host for the third time. He previously helmed the 2017 and 2018 awards.     Credit: Shutterstock /Alex Millauer							  						 The ceremony will be broadcast on ABC.    The ceremony will be broadcast on ABC.     Credit: Chris Chew/UPI/Shutterstock							  						 Nominations have not yet been announced, but the 2023 Oscars will honor the best and brightest of films released in 2022. The Whale, The Fabelmans, Elvis and Everything Everywhere All at Once are strong contenders for top trophies. The official list will be revealed in January 2023.    Nominations have not yet been announced, but the 2023 Oscars will honor the best and brightest of films released in 2022. The Whale, The Fabelmans, Elvis and Everything Everywhere All at Once are strong contenders for top trophies. The official list will be revealed in January 2023.     Credit: Rob Latour/Shutterstock							  						 Despite the drama that ensued during the 2022 ceremony, ABC was pleased with the broadcast.
Mar 29, 2022 | ISBN 9781101980118                                 Buy from Other Retailers:                                    Mar 29, 2022 | ISBN 9780593553077                                 700 Minutes Buy from Other Retailers: “Inventive and thrilling. . . . I couldn’t put it down.” —Brit Bennett, #1 New York Times bestselling author of The Vanishing Half“It’s a thrill to read this novel.” —Jia Tolentino, New York Times bestselling author of Trick MirrorThe gripping story of one scientist in outer space, another who watches over him, the family left behind, and the lengths people will go to protect the people and planet they loveFor twenty years, Alex has believed that his gene-edited superalgae will slow and even reverse the effects of climate change. His obsession with his research has jeopardized his marriage, his relationships with his kids, and his own professional future. When the Son sisters, founders of the colossal tech company Sensus, offer him a chance to complete his research, he seizes the opportunity. The catch? His lab will be in outer space on Parallaxis, the first-ever luxury residential space station built for billionaires. Alex and six other scientists leave Earth and their loved ones to become Pioneers, the beta tenants of Parallaxis. But Parallaxis is not the space palace they were sold.
—Jia Tolentino, New York Times bestselling author of Trick Mirror“If A House Between Earth and the Moon wants us to ask what makes a house into a home, it wants us to know that family is the answer. . . . What A House Between Earth and the Moon suggests is that there is no solution but some kind of strange mix of hope and resignation, a wry kind of wonder.” —Bekah Waakles, Ploughshares“A House Between Earth and the Moon is a compelling, urgent book. I couldn't put it down. Rebecca Scherm brilliantly, and with such heart and tenderness, imagines a frightening future for our planet and our flawed, complicated species, and the worlds she imagines are so vivid, and feel so real I wondered if she owns a crystal ball. I loved these characters and their struggles and desires, and I rooted for them, and worried about them, and I can’t stop thinking about them. This is a remarkable novel.” —Edan Lepucki, New York Times bestselling author of California“If you read just one novel about future billionaires funding scientists to try to save a select few from global warming by making it possible to live in outer space, definitely let it be A House Between Earth and the Moon.
After finding a new date and host city (thanks COVID-19) the 2022 Grammys officially went down in Las Vegas. Going into the night, Late Night with Stephen Colbert bandleader, Jon Batiste had the spotlight, clocking in with a whopping 11 nods in a number of genres. Batiste would end up being a big winner, picking up five 2022 Grammy Awards, including Album of the Year. Doja Cat came into the night with eight nominations. She picked up a W for Best Pop Duo, for her hit "Kiss Me More" It was also a big night for Silk Sonic, who came into the night with four nominations. They swept the night, including Record of the Year and Song of the Year. Best Rap Album was announced before the show and it went to Tyler, the Creator for his unofficial Gangsta GrillzalbumCALL ME IF YOU GET LOST. In one of the most surprising moments of the night, Baby Keem and his cousin Kendrick Lamar won the Best Rap Performance Grammy for "Family Ties." Scroll down to see the list of 2022 Grammys winners. Jon Batiste - We Are  Tony Bennett and Lady Gaga - Love For Sale Justin Bieber - Justice (Triple Chucks Deluxe)   Doja Cat - Planet Her Billie Eilish - Happier Than Ever H.E.R.
Be the first to find out about GRAMMY nominees, winners, important news, and events. Privacy Policy Graphic by the Recording Academy news Find out who won in each of the 86 categories at the 2022 GRAMMYs Editor's Note: The 2022 GRAMMYs Awards show, officially known as the 64th GRAMMY Awards, has been rescheduled to Sunday, April 3, at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas. The below article was updated on Tuesday, Jan. 18, to reflect the new show date and location. Updated Sunday, April 3 The 2022 GRAMMYs, officially known as the 64th GRAMMY Awards, are officially wrapped. See below to see who won golden gramophones at the 2022 GRAMMYs. (The 64th GRAMMY Awards recognize recordings released between Sept. 1, 2020 — Sept. 30, 2021.) Relive the 10 must-see moments from the annual award show. 1. Record Of The YearAward to the Artist and to the Producer(s), Recording Engineer(s) and/or Mixer(s) and mastering engineer(s), if other than the artist.
16] The defending champions were France, who defeated Croatia 4–2 in the 2018 FIFA World Cup Final.[17][18] The event was scheduled to take place under a reduced length,[19] from 20 November to 18 December in Qatar.[20][21][22] Being held in Qatar, it was the first World Cup tournament to be held in the Arab world.[23] Spectators were not required to follow most COVID-19 pandemic restrictions such as social distancing, wearing masks, and negative tests.[24]  Unlike previous FIFA World Cups, which are typically played in June and July, because of Qatar's intense summer heat and often fairly high humidity,[2][21][25] the 2022 World Cup was played in November and December.[5][26] As a result, the World Cup was unusually staged in the middle of the seasons of many domestic association football leagues, which started in late July or August, including all of the major European leagues, which had been obliged to incorporate extended breaks into their domestic schedules to accommodate the World Cup. Major European competitions had scheduled their respective competitions group matches to be played before the World Cup, to avoid playing group matches the following year.[27]  The match schedule was confirmed by FIFA in July 2020.[28] The group stage was set to begin on 21 November, with four matches every day.
The 2022 FIFA World Cup™ in Qatar is the 22nd edition of the biggest sporting event on the planet.  The tournament is already at a fever pitch, being held in the winter for the first time since 1930. The FOX family of networks and the FOX Sports app are your complete home for World Cup content, including live matches, complete highlights, commentary and analysis, and full-match replays. You can also watch full-length replays on Tubi. Check out our FIFA World Cup 2022 Fan Guide for everything you need to know about this year's event. FIFA World Cup 2022™ is scheduled for November 20 to December  18, 2022. Qatar is scheduled to host FIFA World Cup 2022™. It will be the first World Cup held in the Middle East and just the second to be staged in Asia. The FIFA World Cup will air on FOX, FS1, FOXSports.com, the FOX Sports App, and stream for free on Tubi. FOX is your home for game highlights, analysis, standings, team & player stats, and more. Yes. The United States Men’s National Team is back in the World Cup for the first time in eight years. The final draw for the 2022 World Cup in Qatar was held on April 1, 2022. The United States Men’s National Team was drawn to Group B.
Checking Accounts Best Credit Cards for Small Business Best Small Business Loans Best Tax Software for Small Business SELECT All Taxes Best Tax Software Best Tax Software for Small Businesses Tax Refunds SELECT All Help for Low Credit Scores Best Credit Cards for Bad Credit Best Personal Loans for Bad Credit Best Debt Consolidation Loans for Bad Credit Personal Loans if You Don't Have Credit Best Credit Cards for Building Credit Personal Loans for 580 Credit Score or Lower Personal Loans for 670 Credit Score or Lower Best Mortgages for Bad Credit Best Hardship Loans How to Boost Your Credit Score SELECT All Investing Best IRA Accounts Best Roth IRA Accounts Best Investing Apps Best Free Stock Trading Platforms Best Robo-Advisors Index Funds Mutual Funds ETFs Bonds  Tesla just reported first-quarter vehicle production and delivery numbers for 2022. Here's how they did. Electric vehicle deliveries (total): 310,048 Electric vehicle production (total): 305,407 Over the same period last year, Tesla delivered 184,800 electric vehicles and produced 180,338 cars. Model 3 and Model Y vehicles comprised 95%, or 295,324, of deliveries in the first quarter of 2022, according to Tesla. The company produced 4,641 fewer cars than it delivered during the quarter citing "ongoing supply chain challenges and factory shutdowns." Analysts expected deliveries of 317,000 vehicles for the first three months of 2022, according to estimates compiled by FactSet as of March 31.
The first-quarter deliveries compare with analyst expectations of 430,008 vehicles, according to Refinitiv data based on seven analysts. According to a mean of estimates compiled by FactSet as of Friday, Wall Street was expecting Tesla to report deliveries of around 432,000 vehicles for the quarter, the Wall Street Journal and CNBC reported. Tesla missed the figure analysts surveyed by Refinitiv and FactSet were expecting. Other estimates show Tesla beat Wall Street expectations with its 422,875 vehicles delivered. Analysts surveyed by Bloomberg expected 421,164 vehicles would be shipped. Tesla said a consensus of more than 20 analysts called for 421,500 vehicles delivered, Tesla investor Gary Black said in a tweet. Reuters could not independently confirm that figure. The consensus is "all over the place," Munster said. Tesla delivered 6% more of its mainstay Model 3/Model Y vehicles in the first three months of this year than in the previous quarter. But the number of deliveries for its higher-priced Model X/Model S vehicles slumped by 38%. Visitors check a Tesla Model 3 car next to a Model Y displayed at a showroom of the U.S. electric vehicle (EV) maker in Beijing, China February 4, 2023. REUTERS/Florence Lo/File Photo The carmaker produced more cars than it delivered, manufacturing 440,808 vehicles for the first three months of this year.
Searching for your content...  In-Language News   Contact Us    888-776-0942  from 8 AM - 10 PM ET  News provided by 25 Apr, 2022, 14:50 ET Share this article SAN FRANCISCO, April 25, 2022 /PRNewswire/ -- Twitter, Inc. (NYSE: TWTR) today announced that it has entered into a definitive agreement to be acquired by an entity wholly owned by Elon Musk, for $54.20 per share in cash in a transaction valued at approximately $44 billion. Upon completion of the transaction, Twitter will become a privately held company. Under the terms of the agreement, Twitter stockholders will receive $54.20 in cash for each share of Twitter common stock that they own upon closing of the proposed transaction. The purchase price represents a 38% premium to Twitter's closing stock price on April 1, 2022, which was the last trading day before Mr. Musk disclosed his approximately 9% stake in Twitter. Bret Taylor, Twitter's Independent Board Chair, said, "The Twitter Board conducted a thoughtful and comprehensive process to assess Elon's proposal with a deliberate focus on value, certainty, and financing. The proposed transaction will deliver a substantial cash premium, and we believe it is the best path forward for Twitter's stockholders." Parag Agrawal, Twitter's CEO, said, "Twitter has a purpose and relevance that impacts the entire world.
AdvisorsGoldman Sachs & Co. LLC, J.P. Morgan, and Allen & Co. are serving as financial advisors to Twitter, and Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati, Professional Corporation and Simpson Thacher & Bartlett LLP are serving as legal counsel. Morgan Stanley is acting as lead financial advisor to Mr. Musk. BofA Securities and Barclays are also acting as financial advisors. Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP is serving as legal counsel. About Twitter, Inc. (NYSE: TWTR)Twitter is what's happening and what people are talking about right now. To learn more, visit about.twitter.com and follow @Twitter. Let's talk. Additional Information and Where to Find ItTwitter, its directors and certain executive officers are participants in the solicitation of proxies from stockholders in connection with the pending acquisition of Twitter (the "Transaction"). Twitter plans to file a proxy statement (the "Transaction Proxy Statement") with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the "SEC") in connection with the solicitation of proxies to approve the Transaction. Additional information regarding such participants, including their direct or indirect interests, by security holdings or otherwise, will be included in the Transaction Proxy Statement and other relevant documents to be filed with the SEC in connection with the Transaction.
Musk's acquisition of the social media company has been mired in controversy. The richest person in the world said he wanted to own one of the most popular social media platforms -- until he said he didn't. In early October, he reversed course again, saying he wanted to complete the deal. On Oct. 28, he finally did. Tesla CEO Elon Musk completed the deal to acquire Twitter at his original offer price of $54.20 a share at a total cost of roughly $44 billion. In the ensuing days, Musk fired top executives, laid off half of the company's staff, formed a content moderation council that will review account reinstatements and revamped the platform's subscription service. The changes at Twitter mark the latest chapter in a monthslong saga that began in January when Musk started investing in the social media company. Musk reached an acquisition deal with Twitter in April, but over the ensuing weeks, he raised concerns over spam accounts on the platform, claiming Twitter had not provided him with an accurate estimate of their number. Twitter rebuked that claim, saying it has provided Musk with information in accordance with conditions set out in the acquisition deal.
50][51] Agrawal was set to receive $39 million from the buyout, while Dorsey would receive $978 million.[52] Musk had privately selected a new CEO to replace Agrawal upon completion of the acquisition,[35] though he was expected to serve as interim CEO in the months after its completion.[53] Tesla's stock sank by more than $125 billion the next market day, causing Musk to lose about $30 billion of his net worth.[54][55]  After the acceptance was announced, Musk said that his first goal would be to make the algorithm that ranks tweets in the content feed open-sourced, in an effort to increase transparency. He has also stated that he intended to remove spambots and "authenticate all real humans",[56] suggesting that he might convert Twitter's San Francisco headquarters into a homeless shelter.[57][58] Musk said he lacked confidence in Twitter's corporate management,[59] telling banks that he had considered reducing executive and board pay.[35] He published tweets critical of decisions made by Twitter executives such as Vijaya Gadde,[60] who was subsequently harassed by Twitter users using racist and sexist language.[61][62] On April 28, Twitter told advertising agencies that their work would not be seen next to offensive material.[63] Musk also discussed with bankers with the ideas of cutting jobs and costs, encouraging influencers to be creative, and adding subscription services to Twitter.[64][65]
The 2022 Masters Tournament was the 86th edition of the Masters Tournament, the first of the four major golf championships of 2022, held April 7–10 at the Augusta National Golf Club in Augusta, Georgia.  For the first time since the 2019 tournament, attendance returned to full capacity with maximum of 40,000 spectators per day; the traditional par-3 contest also returned.[1][2]  Scottie Scheffler won his first major by three strokes over Rory McIlroy.[3][4] Scheffler had achieved his first PGA Tour win at the WM Phoenix Open two months earlier, and after also winning the Arnold Palmer Invitational and WGC-Dell Technologies Match Play he entered the Masters as world number one.[5]  Scheffler led by a record-tying five strokes after the second round, and held the lead from then on. His main challenger was Cameron Smith, who narrowed the lead to one stroke after the second hole of the final round. On the subsequent hole, Scheffler and Smith found themselves in the same tricky position, with Scheffler chipping in for a birdie, and Smith only managing a bogey, extending the lead to 3 strokes. Smith made a triple bogey on the 12th hole after his ball went into the water, leaving Scheffler relatively unchallenged for the rest of the round.
11]  1. All past winners of the Masters Tournament  2. Recent winners of the U.S. Open (2017–2021)  3. Recent winners of The Open Championship (2017–2021)  4. Recent winners of the PGA Championship (2017–2021)  5. Recent winners of The Players Championship (2020–2022)  6. The winner of the gold medal at the Olympic Games  7. The winner and runner-up in the 2021 U.S. Amateur Championship  8. The winner of the 2021 Amateur Championship  9. The winner of the 2021 Asia-Pacific Amateur Championship  10. The winner of the 2022 Latin America Amateur Championship  11. The winner of the 2021 U.S. Mid-Amateur Golf Championship  12. The leading 12 players, and those tying for 12th place, from the 2021 Masters Tournament  13. The leading four players, and those tying for fourth place, in the 2021 U.S. Open  14. The leading four players, and those tying for fourth place, in the 2021 Open Championship  15. The leading four players, and those tying for fourth place, in the 2021 PGA Championship  16. Winners of PGA Tour events[a] between the 2021 Masters Tournament and the 2022 Masters Tournament
Ashleigh Barty defeated Danielle Collins in the final, 6–3, 7–6(7–2) to win the women's singles tennis title at the 2022 Australian Open. She became the first home player to win an Australian Open singles title since Chris O'Neil in 1978. It was Barty's third major singles title, and she won the title without losing a set, dropping just three service games during the tournament.[1]  The final also marked Barty's last professional appearance, as she announced her retirement from the sport two months later.[2]  Naomi Osaka was the defending champion,[3] but lost to Amanda Anisimova in the third round.[4]  Barty retained the world No. 1 singles ranking after Aryna Sabalenka and Barbora Krejčíková lost in the fourth round and quarterfinals, respectively. Collins entered the WTA top 10 rankings for the first time by reaching the final.[5]  Alizé Cornet reached her first major singles quarterfinal on her 63rd main-draw appearance, surpassing Tamarine Tanasugarn's all-time record, who reached her maiden quarterfinal at the 2008 Wimbledon Championships on her 45th attempt.[6] Kaia Kanepi becomes the first Estonian to reach the quarterfinals at all four majors after her victory over second seed Aryna Sabalenka in the fourth round.
As the 2023 edition of the Australian Open heats up, fans and tennis lovers are starting to get a spring in their step as the air fills with excitement. Arguably the most anticipated Grand Slam on the tennis calendar, the Melbourne tournament has everything and this year won't be different. Ranging from interactive activities to some of the biggest names in the world, the Australian Open doesn't disappoint. Looking back, the 2022 event was nothing short of outstanding. Australian Ash Barty broke a 44-year-old record to claim her first Grand Slam on her home turf. While Rafael Nadal - who notched his 21st Grand Slam - remarkably came back from two sets to love to defeat 2021 US Open (tournament before Aus Open) champion Daniil Medvedev. Here's how it played out. Barty came into the tournament ranked no.1 in the world and knew what it took to win a Grand Slam. Having previously won at Wimbledon (2021) and the French Open (2019), the Queenslander wanted to take home the prize that meant the most: a trophy on her home soil. Despite the pressure of expectation to take out the 2022 championship, Barty's form never wavered throughout the two weeks, resulting in no sets lost. In the final, the Australian came up against American, Danielle Collins, who she had the reign over in previous battles.
Aryna Sabalenka defeated Elena Rybakina in the final, 4–6, 6–3, 6–4 to win the women's singles tennis title at the 2023 Australian Open. It was her first major singles title.[1] Sabalenka dropped just one set during the tournament, to Rybakina in the championship match. Rybakina became the first Kazakhstani player to progress past the fourth round, and the first player since Jennifer Capriati in 2001 to defeat three consecutive major champions in a single edition of the Australian Open.[2] By reaching the final, Rybakina made her debut in the top ten of the WTA Rankings.  Ashleigh Barty was the reigning champion,[3] but she retired from professional tennis in March 2022.[4]  Barty's retirement and Angelique Kerber and Naomi Osaka’s absences (both due to pregnancy) meant that Victoria Azarenka and Sofia Kenin were the only former champions left in the draw. They met in the first round, with Azarenka winning in straight sets.[5]  Jeļena Ostapenko became the first Latvian to reach the Australian Open quarterfinals.[6]  Click on the seed number of a player to go to their draw section.  The following are the seeded players. Seedings are based on WTA rankings as of 9 January 2023.
1:45PM - Top serve speeds -  Rybakina - 195 km/h (1st serve) Sabalenka - 193 km/h (2nd serve) 1:40PM - Not much to separate these two Arriving at the finals in similar style ⏱️@ROLEX • #AusOpen • #AO2023pic.twitter.com/L9kZ8Ay3PP 1:35PM - Sabalenka’s road to the final 1:30PM - Rybakina’s road to the final 1:25PM - Previous meetings: 2021 Wimbledon, Round of 16: Sabalenka won 6-3, 4-6, 6-3 2021 Abu Dhabi, Quarterfinal: Sabalenka won 6-4, 4-6, 6-3 2019 Wuhan, Quarterfinal: Sabalenka won 6-3, 1-6, 6-1 1:20PM - HEAD-TO-HEAD RECORD Player: 3 | Sabalenka: 3 | Rybakina: 0 1:15PM - Rybakina and Sabalenka have been in superb form at this year’s Australian Open. While the former has impressed with her serve, the latter has dominated her opponents with her power. A thrilling final is on the cards. Live action begins at 2PM.
As the 2023 edition of the Australian Open heats up, fans and tennis lovers are starting to get a spring in their step as the air fills with excitement. Arguably the most anticipated Grand Slam on the tennis calendar, the Melbourne tournament has everything and this year won't be different. Ranging from interactive activities to some of the biggest names in the world, the Australian Open doesn't disappoint. Looking back, the 2022 event was nothing short of outstanding. Australian Ash Barty broke a 44-year-old record to claim her first Grand Slam on her home turf. While Rafael Nadal - who notched his 21st Grand Slam - remarkably came back from two sets to love to defeat 2021 US Open (tournament before Aus Open) champion Daniil Medvedev. Here's how it played out. Barty came into the tournament ranked no.1 in the world and knew what it took to win a Grand Slam. Having previously won at Wimbledon (2021) and the French Open (2019), the Queenslander wanted to take home the prize that meant the most: a trophy on her home soil. Despite the pressure of expectation to take out the 2022 championship, Barty's form never wavered throughout the two weeks, resulting in no sets lost. In the final, the Australian came up against American, Danielle Collins, who she had the reign over in previous battles.
* Helped Serbia win the inaugural ATP Cup in 2020 before triumphing at Melbourne Park for the eighth time. * With 2019 champion Nadal and Federer opting to skip the 2020 U.S. Open, Djokovic was favourite to triumph but was defaulted in the fourth round after accidentally hitting a line judge in the throat with a ball. The disqualification ended his 26-0 winning run in 2020. * Lost to Nadal in straight sets in the final of the rescheduled 2020 French Open. * Beat Daniil Medvedev for a record-extending ninth Australian Open title in 2021. * Beat Stefanos Tsitsipas for his second French Open title and 19th Grand Slam crown, thus becoming the first man since tennis turned professional in 1968 to win all four majors at least twice. * Beat Matteo Berrettini in the Wimbledon final to win a 20th singles Grand Slam title. * His bid for a calendar-year Grand Slam in 2021 fell short after he lost to Medvedev in the U.S. Open final. * Missed the Australian Open in 2022 after being deported from the country for not being vaccinated against COVID-19. * Beat Nick Kyrgios in the Wimbledon final to win his 21st Grand Slam title and fourth straight crown at the All England Club.
By : Neha Dhyani Updated : Jun 11, 2023, 22:37 The 2023 Australian Open Winner in the Men’s Singles category is Novak Djokovic. Djokovic defeated Stefanos Tsitsipas with a score of 6–3, 7–6(7–4), 7–6(7–5) in the finals to claim his 10th Australian Open title. In the Women’s Singles category, Aryna Sabalenka (Belarus) made history by defeating Elena Rybakina (Kazakhstan). Find out the complete list of 2023 Australian Open winners here. We have shared the winners of the Men’s Singles and Doubles, Women’s Singles and Doubles, and Mixed Doubles here, along with the details of the final scores. The 2023 Australian Open was held at Melbourne Park, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. The 111th edition of the Grand Slam tournament was held from 16—29 January 2023.
As in the previous major held a few months earlier, neither of the top two seeds advanced to the quarterfinals, with Nadal and Ruud both losing in the second round; this marked the first men's singles major since the 2002 Australian Open where the top two seeds lost prior to the third round.[7][8] Tsitsipas became the youngest finalist since Djokovic in 2011.[9] Tommy Paul became the first American man to reach the semifinals since Andy Roddick in 2009.[10]  With his win over Thanasi Kokkinakis in the longest match of his career, Andy Murray won a match from two sets down for a record eleventh time.[11]  Click on the seed number of a player to go to their draw section.  The following are the seeded players. Seedings are based on ATP rankings as of 9 January 2023. Rankings and points before are as of 16 January 2023.  † The player did not qualify for the main draw in 2022. He is defending points from two 2022 ATP Challenger Tour tournaments (Concepción and Santa Cruz) instead.  The following players would have been seeded, but withdrew before the tournament began.  Source:[14]  Source:[15]  Source:[16]  The entry list was released by Tennis Australia based on the ATP rankings for the week of 5 December 2022.[17]
Play Now                                                           Football Pick'em                                                               Play Now                                                           College Pick'em   See who to add and drop   PGA Tour and beyond  The 2022 French Open women's final represented a moment for the sport that could be called a changing of the guard. While Iga Swiatek entered the final with a Grand Slam title in her trophy case already -- and on a 34-match winning streak -- the 21-year-old is still just coming into her own as one of the world's great players. She staked a dominant claim to that as she cruised to victory over Coco Gauff with a 6-1, 6-3 win in the final at Roland Garros in a match where she was almost never seriously challenged.   Swiatek won the fall edition of the French Open in 2020 after it was postponed due to COVID-19 -- and she told NBC Sports after this win why taking home the trophy as the No. 1 player in the world is different than being a surprise winner and the lowest-ranked woman to ever win the event. "I feel like two years ago I was pretty lucky that I could be there and basically I was living kind of in a bubble for two weeks," said Swiatek, the only Polish player to win a Grand Slam title. "This time I felt the pressure. ...
Iga Świątek defeated Coco Gauff in the final, 6–1, 6–3 to win the women's singles tennis title at the 2022 French Open.[1] It was her second French Open title, and she dropped just one set en route, in the fourth round to Zheng Qinwen. With the win, Świątek extended her winning streak to 35 matches (dating back to the Qatar Open in February), equaling Venus Williams' tally from the 2000 season.[2] Świątek also became the youngest winner of multiple majors since Maria Sharapova in 2006.[3]  Barbora Krejčíková was the defending champion,[4] but she lost in the first round to Diane Parry. This marked only the third time in French Open history that the defending champion lost in the first round (after Anastasia Myskina in 2005 and Jeļena Ostapenko in 2018), and the record fifteenth consecutive unsuccessful French Open women's singles title defense since 2007.[5]  17-year-old Linda Nosková became the youngest qualifier to debut in the main draw since Michelle Larcher de Brito in 2009.[6][7][8][9] This was the second time in the Open Era when only one out of the top ten seeds advanced to the fourth round of a major, after 2018 Wimbledon.[10]
Top seed Iga Swiatek of Poland faces 43rd-ranked Czech Karolina Muchova in the French Open women’s singles final, live on NBC Sports, NBCSports.com/live, the NBC Sports app and Peacock on Saturday at 9 a.m. ET. Swiatek can join Serena Williams and Justine Henin as the lone women to win three or more French Opens since 2000. Having turned 22 last week, she can become the youngest woman to win three French Opens since Monica Seles in 1992 and the youngest woman to win four Slams overall since Williams in 2002. FRENCH OPEN: Broadcast Schedule | Men’s Draw Swiatek didn’t lose a set en route to the final, losing just 23 games in her first six matches, exactly how she marched to her first Roland Garros final in 2020. In the final she gets a surprise. Muchova upset No. 2 seed Aryna Sabalenka of Belarus in the semifinals to reach her first major final. No. 3 Jessica Pegula, the highest-seeded American man or woman, was eliminated in the third round. No. 4 Elena Rybakina of Kazakhstan, who has three wins over Swiatek this year, withdrew before her third-round match due to illness. No.
Defending champion Iga Świątek[1] defeated Karolína Muchová in the final, 6–2, 5–7, 6–4 to win the women's singles tennis title at the 2023 French Open. It was her third French Open title and fourth major title overall.[2] Świątek became the third woman in the Open Era (after Monica Seles and Naomi Osaka) to win her first four major finals, and the youngest woman to win four majors since Serena Williams in 2002.[3] Świątek also became the first player to defend the French Open title since Justine Henin in 2007, and the first woman to defend a major title since Serena Williams at the 2016 Wimbledon Championships. Świątek dropped just one set en route to the title, to Muchová in the final. Świątek retained the world No. 1 ranking after she reached the final and Aryna Sabalenka lost in the semifinals.[4][5][6]  12 of the 32 seeds reached the third round, the fewest since the French Open's draw was increased to 32 seeds in 2002.[7] Elina Avanesyan became the first lucky loser to reach the fourth round since Nicole Jagerman in 1988, and the first at any major since María José Gaidano at the 1993 US Open.[8]
Subscribers Only Have you subscribed yet? Buy Print  Updated : Jun 11, 2023 03:44 IST   Comments  Follow Us SHARE READ LATER  Poland’s Iga Swiatek celebrates with the Suzanne Lenglen Cup after beating Karolina Muchova of Czech Republic in the Women's Singles Final match of French Open 2023 at Roland Garros on Saturday in Paris.  Welcome to Sportstar’s highlights of the French Open 2023 women’s singles final in which Iga Swiatek beat Karolina Muchova. This was Nihit Sachdeva taking you through the action as it unfolded on Court Philippe-Chatrier at Roland-Garros, Paris.(* denotes server) Tomorrow is the last day of this year’s French Open and there are two finals in store for the tennis fans. First up, it will be the women’s doubles final between the Canadian-American pair of Leylah Fernandez and Taylor Townsend and the Chinese Taipei and Chinese duo of Su-Wei Hsieh and Xinyu Wang. Post that will be the big event - the men’s singles final between Novak Djokovic, who is chasing a record-breaking 23rd Grand Slam title, and Norway’s Casper Ruud.  Do join us for live coverage. Till then, take care and stay safe! “First of all, congrats to Karolina.
Defending champion Iga Świątek[1] defeated Karolína Muchová in the final, 6–2, 5–7, 6–4 to win the women's singles tennis title at the 2023 French Open. It was her third French Open title and fourth major title overall.[2] Świątek became the third woman in the Open Era (after Monica Seles and Naomi Osaka) to win her first four major finals, and the youngest woman to win four majors since Serena Williams in 2002.[3] Świątek also became the first player to defend the French Open title since Justine Henin in 2007, and the first woman to defend a major title since Serena Williams at the 2016 Wimbledon Championships. Świątek dropped just one set en route to the title, to Muchová in the final. Świątek retained the world No. 1 ranking after she reached the final and Aryna Sabalenka lost in the semifinals.[4][5][6]  12 of the 32 seeds reached the third round, the fewest since the French Open's draw was increased to 32 seeds in 2002.[7] Elina Avanesyan became the first lucky loser to reach the fourth round since Nicole Jagerman in 1988, and the first at any major since María José Gaidano at the 1993 US Open.[8]
She is a Polish player who has won the singles title three times, twice in the French Open in 2020 and 2022, and once in the US Open in 2022. Rafael Nadal has won the French Open 14 times in the men’s singles category. He is also the 2022 French Open winner in men’s singles. Nadal is touted as the greatest of all time because of his exceptional tennis career. He won his 22nd Grand Slam title after winning the French Open in 2022. The French Open winners in women’s doubles were Wang Xinyu/Hsieh Su-wei. In men’s doubles, Ivan Dodig/Austin Krajicek won against Sander Gillé/Karolína Muchová. The 2023 French Open winners were awarded their trophies at the award ceremony. We have shared the list of 2023 French Open winners here. Find the names of the winners in men’s and women’s singles, men’s and women’s doubles and mixed doubles categories here.
French Open Category Winner Runner-up Final Score Men's singles Novak Djokovic Casper Ruud 7–6, 6–3, 7–5 Men's doubles Ivan Dodig Austin Krajicek Joran Vliegen Sander Gillé 6–3, 6–1 Women's singles Iga Świątek Karolína Muchová 6–2, 5–7, 6–4 Women's doubles Wang Xinyu Hsieh Su-wei Taylor Townsend Leylah Annie Fernandez 1–6, 7–6, 6–1 Mixed doubles Miyu Kato Tim Pütz Bianca Andreescu Michael Venus 4–6, 6–4, 10–6 France has not only produced the game but also has given the world some amazingly talented French Open Winners and thrilling tennis tournaments. The French Open or Roland Garros is one of the four annual Grand Slam tournaments. We have shared more about the 2023 French Open Winners here: The list of 2022 French Open Winners for the men’s and women’s singles champions, men’s and women’s doubles champions and mixed champions is shared below.
Novak Djokovic defeated Casper Ruud in the final, 7–6(7–1), 6–3, 7–5 to win the men's singles tennis title at the 2023 French Open. It was his third French Open title and his record-breaking 23rd men's singles major title overall, surpassing the record he previously held jointly with Rafael Nadal.[1] With the victory, Djokovic became the first man to achieve a triple career Grand Slam, and became the oldest French Open champion at the age of 36 years and 20 days.[2]  Nadal was the reigning champion,[3] but withdrew due to a left hip injury. This was the first time the 14-time champion missed the tournament since his debut in 2005.[4] With his withdrawal, Nadal fell out of the top 100 of the ATP rankings for the first time since 2003.[5]  By winning the title, Djokovic reclaimed the world No. 1 singles ranking from Carlos Alcaraz; Daniil Medvedev and Stefanos Tsitsipas were also in contention for the top ranking at the beginning of the tournament.[6][7] Medvedev's loss to Thiago Seyboth Wild in the first round marked the first time since 2000 that the second seed (then Pete Sampras) lost in the opening round.
The first set was tight until 6-all, and then Djokovic simply took over, dominating the tiebreaker — as he often does — and the second set, before grabbing 12 of the last 13 points to seal the victory. That allowed Djokovic to break his tie with Nadal at 22 majors. Federer, who announced his retirement last year, is next among men with 20, while Djokovic’s idol, Pete Sampras, is fourth with 14. And to think: Sampras set that mark by winning his last Slam in what turned out to be the last match of his career, the 2002 U.S. Open final. Here we are, just 21 years later, and not only did three guys surpass Sampras, but Djokovic moved way past him. Serena Williams finished her career last year with 23 majors, the most for a woman in the Open era. Margaret Court won 24, some during the amateur era. Djokovic’s win also moved back into the top spot of the ATP rankings, jumping from No. 3 to replace Carlos Alcaraz at No. 1. Djokovic beat Alcaraz in the semifinals. The women’s singles title in Paris was won on Saturday by Iga Swiatek, who defeated Karolina Muchova 6-2, 5-7, 6-4.
LONDON, ENGLAND - JULY 13: Ons Jabeur of Tunisia celebrates victory against Aryna Sabalenka following the Women’s Singles Semi Finals on day eleven of The Championships Wimbledon 2023 at All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club on July 13, 2023 in London, England. (Photo by Mike Hewitt/Getty Images) Getty Images Ons Jabeur plays Marketa Vondrousova in the Wimbledon women’s singles final, each seeking a first major title. Jabeur, the Wimbledon and U.S. Open runner-up last year, took out No. 2 seed Aryna Sabalenka in a three-set semifinal. Jabeur, the No. 6 seed from Tunisia, lost the 2022 Wimbledon final from a set up on Kazakh Elena Rybakina. She is the lone African woman, and lone Arab or North African man or woman, to reach a major final. The Czech Vondrousova, the 2019 French Open runner-up, became the first unseeded Wimbledon women’s finalist since Billie Jean King in 1963. At No. 42 in the world, she is the second-lowest-ranked Wimbledon women’s finalist since the rankings were created in 1975. Serena Williams was No. 181 when she made the 2018 final coming back from childbirth. World No.
1 Iga Swiatek was taken out in the quarterfinals by Ukrainian mom Elina Svitolina. Svitolina, the former world No. 3, lost to Vondrousova in the semis. No. 7 seed Coco Gauff was upset in the first round by Sofia Kenin, the last American woman to win a major at the 2020 Australian Open. Though Serena Williams retired last year, older sister Venus, 43, received a wild card to compete in her 24th Wimbledon singles draw. She was eliminated in the first round by Svitolina. 2023 Wimbledon Women’s Singles Draw (may need to zoom in on desktop)  DISCLAIMER: This site and the products offered are for entertainment purposes only, and there is no gambling offered on this site. This service is intended for adult audiences. No guarantees are made for any specific outcome. If you or someone you know has a gambling problem, please call 1-800-GAMBLER. PointsBet is our Official Sports Betting Partner and we may receive compensation if you place a bet on PointsBet for the first time after clicking our links.
LONDON, ENGLAND - JULY 13: Ons Jabeur of Tunisia celebrates victory against Aryna Sabalenka following the Women’s Singles Semi Finals on day eleven of The Championships Wimbledon 2023 at All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club on July 13, 2023 in London, England. (Photo by Mike Hewitt/Getty Images) Getty Images Ons Jabeur plays Marketa Vondrousova in the Wimbledon women’s singles final, each seeking a first major title. Jabeur, the Wimbledon and U.S. Open runner-up last year, took out No. 2 seed Aryna Sabalenka in a three-set semifinal. Jabeur, the No. 6 seed from Tunisia, lost the 2022 Wimbledon final from a set up on Kazakh Elena Rybakina. She is the lone African woman, and lone Arab or North African man or woman, to reach a major final. The Czech Vondrousova, the 2019 French Open runner-up, became the first unseeded Wimbledon women’s finalist since Billie Jean King in 1963. At No. 42 in the world, she is the second-lowest-ranked Wimbledon women’s finalist since the rankings were created in 1975. Serena Williams was No. 181 when she made the 2018 final coming back from childbirth. World No.
1 Iga Swiatek was taken out in the quarterfinals by Ukrainian mom Elina Svitolina. Svitolina, the former world No. 3, lost to Vondrousova in the semis. No. 7 seed Coco Gauff was upset in the first round by Sofia Kenin, the last American woman to win a major at the 2020 Australian Open. Though Serena Williams retired last year, older sister Venus, 43, received a wild card to compete in her 24th Wimbledon singles draw. She was eliminated in the first round by Svitolina. 2023 Wimbledon Women’s Singles Draw (may need to zoom in on desktop)  DISCLAIMER: This site and the products offered are for entertainment purposes only, and there is no gambling offered on this site. This service is intended for adult audiences. No guarantees are made for any specific outcome. If you or someone you know has a gambling problem, please call 1-800-GAMBLER. PointsBet is our Official Sports Betting Partner and we may receive compensation if you place a bet on PointsBet for the first time after clicking our links.
Three-time defending champion Novak Djokovic defeated Nick Kyrgios in the final, 4–6, 6–3, 6–4, 7–6(7–3) to win the gentlemen's singles tennis title at the 2022 Wimbledon Championships. It was his seventh Wimbledon title and 21st major singles title overall.[1] Djokovic became the fifth man in the Open Era to record a streak of at least four consecutive titles at one major.[2] By reaching his 32nd men's singles major final, he surpassed the all-time record he had jointly held with Roger Federer.[3] Djokovic also became the first player (male or female) to win 80 matches at all four majors with his first-round win over Kwon Soon-woo.[4] Because no ranking points were awarded for the tournament in response to its banning of Russian and Belarusian players, Djokovic dropped out of the top five in ATP rankings after the tournament.[5]  Kyrgios became the first unseeded man to reach a major final since Jo-Wilfried Tsonga at the 2008 Australian Open, the first Australian man to reach a major final since Lleyton Hewitt at the 2005 Australian Open, and the first unseeded or Australian man to reach the Wimbledon final since Mark Philippoussis in 2003.[6]
Djokovic played Kyrgios in the final after the volatile Australian advanced from the semifinals without playing because of an injury suffered by two-time champion Rafael Nadal. The popular Spaniard will not be competing in 2023 because he has undergone surgery on a hip problem, leading him to hint that 2024 will be his last in the sport. Elena Rybakina won her first grand slam title and became the first Kazakhstani to win a major when she recovered from a set down to beat Jabeur in the women's singles final. Tunisian Jabeur, who was aiming to become the first African or Arab to win a grand slam crown in the Open Era, was 14 places above Rybakina in the rankings. Simona Halep, champion in 2019, was Rybakina's victim in the quarterfinals, losing in straight sets to the player who would succeed the retired Ash Barty as champion. A post shared by Elena Rybakina 🐠 (@lenarybakina)  Roger Federer is the most successful men's singles player at Wimbledon. His eight titles include a remarkable run of five in a row from 2003. Federer's retirement in 2022 means Djokovic needs to win Wimbledon once more to draw level with the Swiss superstar's record. The winner of the last four editions, it is conceivable that the Serbian, 36, will become the outright record holder before he contemplates retirement.
Carlos Alcaraz defeated the four-time defending champion Novak Djokovic in the final, 1–6, 7–6(8–6), 6–1, 3–6, 6–4 to win the gentlemen's singles tennis title at the 2023 Wimbledon Championships. It was his first Wimbledon title and second major singles title overall.[1]  Alcaraz, Djokovic, and Daniil Medvedev were in contention for the men's singles No. 1 ranking. Alcaraz retained the No. 1 ranking with his victory, [2][3] and became the first player to qualify for the year-end championships.[4]  For the first time since Lleyton Hewitt in 2002, the top seed and winner of the event was not a member of the Big Four. Stan Wawrinka was attempting to complete the career Grand Slam, but was defeated by Djokovic in the third round.  Djokovic's loss ended his third major bid to become the first man to win all four Grand Slam events in a calendar year since Rod Laver in 1969. He previously lost his first attempt at Wimbledon in 2016, and his second, at the US Open, in 2021.  Click on the seed number of a player to go to their draw section.  The following are the seeded players. Seedings are based on ATP rankings as of 26 June 2023.
Rankings and points before are as of 3 July 2023.  No ranking points were awarded for the 2022 tournament due to the ban on Russian and Belarusian players.[5] However, because the tournament takes place one week later this year, players are defending points from tournaments that took place during the week of 11 July 2022 (Båstad, Newport, and 2022 ATP Challenger Tour tournaments). Players who are not defending any points from those tournaments will have their 19th best result (shown in brackets in the table below) replaced with their points from the 2023 Wimbledon Championships.  † The player is defending points from Båstad, Newport, or one or more ATP Challenger Tour events (Porto, Rome, Lüdenscheid or Amersfoort).  The following players would have been seeded, but withdrew before the tournament began.  † The player is defending points from Båstad or Braunschweig.  Source:[6]  The entry list was released based on the ATP rankings for the week of 22 May 2023.[7][8]
She is tied for third with Angelique Kerber among active players. Only Venus Williams (7) and Naomi Osaka (4) have more.  4 – Number of sets that Swiatek lost on clay in 2022, in 19 matches.  5 – Number of times Swiatek won a set by 6-0 (three times) or 6-1 (twice) in a final in 2022.  6 – Number of titles that Swiatek won during her 37-match winning streak this season – Doha, Indian Wells, Miami, Stuttgart, Rome and Roland-Garros.  7 – Number of works of literature Swiatek reads each month (just kidding, we couldn’t find a 7).  8 – Swiatek mustered an 8-1 record in finals to improve to 11-2 lifetime in tour-level title matches.  10 – Number of victories that Swiatek earned from a set down in 2022, compared to seven in 2020 and 2021 combined.  15 – Number of top 10 wins that Swiatek reeled off in succession, from January to November. match win streak against top 10 opposition. Per WTA Media, only Martina Navratilova (20) and Steffi Graf (17) produced bigger streaks against the top 10 in the last 40 years.
While Swiatek is a heavy favorite and coming off a monumental season, there are a few others who finished 2022 on even hotter streaks that they will look to continue in the new year. Caroline Garcia, Felix Auger-Aliassime and Holger Rune combined for seven individual titles from August through the end of the season. No woman was more dominant on the hard court during the latter part of 2022 than Garcia, who won the title in Cincinnati, notched the first major semifinal appearance of her career at the US Open and concluded the year with a WTA Finals trophy -- and a matching cowboy hat. Auger-Aliassime, 22, notched three consecutive titles in October, and helped lead Canada to its first Davis Cup victory and Team World to a Laver Cup title. During that dominant stretch, he defeated Djokovic, Nadal and Alcaraz and made it clear he could beat just about anyone. But the man who stopped Auger-Aliassime's win streak? That would be 19-year-old Rune. After losing to the Canadian at the Swiss Indoors final, Rune got his revenge at the semifinals of the Paris Masters the very next week. Rune then beat Djokovic, 3-6, 6-3, 7-5, to win the 1000-level title, his second title of the fall.
Advertisement Supported by Swiatek, the world No. 1, beat Jabeur in straight sets to capture her first U.S. Open singles title. It is her third Grand Slam title and first on a surface other than clay. By Matthew Futterman The 2022 U.S. Open will always be remembered — outside of Poland, at least — for its farewell to Serena Williams, long the queen of tennis and the greatest women’s player ever. Beware, though, after Poland’s Iga Swiatek won the women’s singles title Saturday, beating Ons Jabeur of Tunisia Saturday afternoon at Arthur Ashe Stadium, the sport may have a new ruler on its hands. Swiatek, the world No. 1, lived up to her billing and beat Jabeur, 6-2, 7-6(5), to capture her first U.S. Open singles title. It was the third Grand Slam title of Swiatek’s brief career and her first on a surface other than clay. When Jabeur’s last forehand sailed long, Swiatek collapsed on her back after a 1 hour, 51 minute duel that got dangerously close as the afternoon wore on.
Serena Williams, the Open Era record 23-time major singles champion, was the story of the first week of the U.S. Open after announcing plans to soon retire from tennis. She won her first two matches at what is expected to be her last tournament, including over No. 2 seed Anett Kontaveit, before falling to Ajla Tomljanovic. Coco Gauff, the French Open runner-up and, at 18, the youngest player in the top 100, lost in the quarterfinals to Frenchwoman Caroline Garcia. MORE: U.S. Open Men’s Singles Draw OlympicTalk is on Apple News. Favorite us!   2022 U.S. Open Women’s Singles Draw   DISCLAIMER: This site and the products offered are for entertainment purposes only, and there is no gambling offered on this site. This service is intended for adult audiences. No guarantees are made for any specific outcome. If you or someone you know has a gambling problem, please call 1-800-GAMBLER. PointsBet is our Official Sports Betting Partner and we may receive compensation if you place a bet on PointsBet for the first time after clicking our links.
Carlos Alcaraz defeated Casper Ruud in the final, 6–4, 2–6, 7–6(7–1), 6–3 to win the men's singles tennis title at the 2022 US Open. It was his first major title, and he claimed the world No. 1 singles ranking with the win.[1] Ruud, Rafael Nadal, Daniil Medvedev, and Stefanos Tsitsipas were also in contention for the top position.[2] Alcaraz saved a match point en route to the title, in the quarterfinals against Jannik Sinner.[3]  Alcaraz became the youngest major champion since Nadal at the 2005 French Open, the youngest US Open champion since Pete Sampras in 1990, the first man born in the 2000s to win a major singles title, and the youngest man to be ranked world No. 1 in tennis history, surpassing the record Lleyton Hewitt held.[4] Alcaraz also became the third player to reach a major final having won three consecutive five-set matches, after Stefan Edberg at the 1992 US Open and Andre Agassi at the 2005 US Open.[5] At 23 hours and 39 minutes of play duration across his seven matches, Alcaraz spent the longest time on court in major history.
Ruud became the first Norwegian man to reach the championship match.[6]  Daniil Medvedev was the defending champion,[7] but lost in the fourth round to Nick Kyrgios.[8] Medvedev became the first man outside the Big Four to be the top seed at a major since Andy Roddick at the 2004 Australian Open.[9]  This marked the third consecutive US Open where a player claimed his maiden major title.[10] The quarterfinal line-up guaranteed a first-time major champion,[11] while the semifinal line-up marked the first time all four players made their US Open semifinal debut since the inaugural edition in 1881.[12]  Frances Tiafoe became the first American man to reach the US Open semifinals since Roddick in 2006, and the semifinals of any major since John Isner at the 2018 Wimbledon Championships. Tiafoe also became the first African American man to reach the US Open semifinals since Arthur Ashe in 1972 and the first African American man to reach any Grand Slam semifinal since MaliVai Washington in 1996.[13] Sinner became the youngest man to reach the quarterfinals at all four majors since Novak Djokovic in 2008.[14]  Nadal was vying for a record-extending 23rd major singles title, but lost in the fourth round to Tiafoe.
The 2022 Virginia Tech Hokies football team represented Virginia Tech during the 2022 NCAA Division I FBS football season. The Hokies were led by first-year head coach Brent Pry. They played their home games at Lane Stadium in Blacksburg, Virginia, competing as members of the Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC).  The Hokies finished the 2021 season 6–7, 4–4 in ACC play to finish in a tie for third place in the Coastal division.[1] They received an invitation to the 2021 Pinstripe Bowl where they lost to Maryland 54–10.[2]  On November 16, 2021, the school fired head coach Justin Fuente after six years as head coach.[3] Assistant coach J. C. Price was named the interim coach and coached the Hokies in the Pinstripe Bowl.[4] On November 30, the school named Penn State defensive coordinator Brent Pry the team's new head coach.[5]  [7][8]  The game was canceled due to the 2022 University of Virginia shooting, which killed 3 players on Virginia's team. Roster Last update: 5/28/23
The problem has always been that Virginia Tech’s Offense has been consistently unsophisticated and tragically underperforming for nearly a generation. Even in the heyday years the offense was never much to write home to Mommy about. It always relied heavily on the physical talents of a few key players and scoring just enough points to win close games that the defense kept in check. If the QB was good and had some good receivers and running backs the rather pedestrian affair managed to get the job done and a few folks drafted into the NFL. As far as scheme, game planning, and play calling, Tech’s “Theory of Offense” managed to be run the ball twice throw on third down and do that until stopped by the goal line or a 4th down.  Look, in the “old days” of college football that formula, and a great defense and surprising special teams netted ten-win seasons and bowl games. It’s not those days anymore. Offenses that do not plan to score 35-points or more, every single game, are not going to get much further than a booger bowl and a bag of goodies for showing up around the holidays.  Before we launch into the charts for players, let’s look at the critical two coaches who will have the most to say about how the 2022 Hokie Offense runs, and in particular how the subject of this article will be managed.
May 29 - 31, 2024 May 29 - 31, 2024 Austin, Texas  Austin, TX About Overview Who We Are 2023 Videos Participate Register Now Marketing Partnerships Terms Merchandise Sponsors Become a Sponsor Add two passes to your cart and enter code 2FOR1 at checkout. Consensus 2023 videos are now available to watch with a free CoinDesk account. Consensus is the world's largest, longest-running and most influential gathering that brings together all sides of the cryptocurrency, blockchain and Web3 community. From hard-hitting conversations with visionary speakers to hands-on workshops aimed at solving industry challenges, developers, investors, founders, brands, policymakers and more will walk away with the tools and insights needed to continue laying the foundation of a more decentralized future. It is called “Consensus” for a reason. This event is the primary forum where the industry comes together to discuss the most pivotal matters of the day, highlight the biggest successes and debate the most critical conversations. Consensus 2024 is your chance to be a part of the most important conversation in crypto and Web3.  Watch highlights from Consensus 2023! Consensus 2023 was the place for dealmaking as the ecosystem continues to mature. Very impressive. What I love about Consensus is that it’s a place for people from all walks of life. You can connect with people from different age groups and professional backgrounds and that is so important.
While the emergence and growth of Web3-focused projects are notable, it’s also important to point out that current market conditions have been challenging for other key players. Peter Wall, CEO of Argo Blockchain — a cryptocurrency mining company — told Cointelegraph that many Bitcoin miners raised equity in 2021, but this has become difficult for some, given the bear market.  “There are only two ways for miners to raise capital now, which is either through debt or by selling Bitcoin,” he said. Although this may be, Wall elaborated that only miners with a reputable track record will receive loans. “They need to be able to execute with clear plans, while not being over committed to machine purchases and bills they can’t pay.” Regulations were also heavily discussed at the conference. This shouldn’t come as a surprise, as a number of key regulatory events took place leading up to the event. For example, the bipartisan crypto bill, also known as the “Responsible Financial Innovation Act,” was introduced in the United States Senate on June 7, 2022. According to a statement, the bipartisan bill sponsored by senators Cynthia Lummis of Wyoming and Kirsten Gillibrand of New York, “addresses CFTC and SEC jurisdiction, stablecoin regulation, banking, tax treatment of digital assets, and interagency coordination.
The 2022 Kentucky Derby (officially, the 148th Running of the Kentucky Derby Presented by Woodford Reserve[1]) took place on Saturday, May 7, 2022, at Churchill Downs in Louisville, Kentucky. It was the 148th running of the Kentucky Derby, a 1+1⁄4 miles (2.0 km) Grade I stakes race for three-year-old Thoroughbreds. The Derby is held annually at Churchill Downs on the first Saturday in May since its inception in 1875. The 20 horses that ran in the Derby qualified by earning points in the 2022 Road to the Kentucky Derby.  The two favorites for the 2022 Kentucky Derby were Epicenter, the winner of the Louisiana Derby, and Zandon, the winner of the Blue Grass Stakes. Both horses finished behind winner Rich Strike, who had only entered the race after a late scratch. Entering the race at odds of 80–1, Rich Strike's victory was the second-largest upset in Derby history. It was the first Kentucky Derby victory for his trainer Eric Reed, as well as the first graded stakes win in any race for his jockey Sonny Leon.  Participation in the Kentucky Derby is restricted to three-year-old Thoroughbreds.
The 2023 Kentucky Derby is near. Its rich history, the high stakes, and its stature has made it one of the most prestigious horse races in the world. This importance makes the whole day an event in itself, with a number of traditions and festivities leading up to the race itself, starting two weeks before the race, with the Kentucky Derby Festival. The day starts with a “dawn patrol”, where the horses that will be racing are taken out for a morning workout. During this routine, the trainers and owners have a chance to see how their horses are feeling and make any last-minute adjustments to their strategy. A few races precede the Kentucky Derby, which is run in the late afternoon with the horses parading onto the track to the sound of “My Old Kentucky Home”, the state anthem. The race itself is short, only lasting around two minutes, which is the reason why the race is known as “The Most Exciting Two Minutes in Sports”. Once the race ends, the winner is draped in a blanket of roses and presented with the coveted Kentucky Derby trophy. The purse, or prize, for the race will be $3 million. The 2023 Kentucky Derby will take place on Saturday, May 6, 2023. The Kentucky Derby almost always takes place on the first Saturday in May, capping the two-week-long Kentucky Derby Festival, an annual festival held in the weeks preceding the day of the main race.
Today after the bell American electric vehicle giant Tesla reported its first-quarter performance. The company detailed revenues of $18.76 billion and $2.86 worth of earnings per share, up from its Q1 2021 results of top line worth $10.389 billion and earnings per share of 93 cents.  Tesla said it faced several challenges in the first quarter related to global supply chain, transportation, labor and manufacturing issues and that the problems could limit its ability to run its factories at full capacity. The automaker also warned of continued supply constraints that could hamper future production, despite the recent openings of its Gigafactories in Berlin and Texas that will build the Model Y. “Our own factories have been running below capacity for several quarters as supply chain became the main limiting factor, which is likely to continue through the rest of 2022,” the automaker said in its financial outlook. Tesla reported $3.32 billion worth of net income, a 658% increase from the $438 million reported for the same period last year. The company’s profit result stands out as it is by far the company’s largest in recent history, towering around $1 billion above its Q4 2021 net income results. The figures bested analysts expectations in both revenue and net income terms. Per data from Yahoo Finance, analysts expected that Tesla would generate Q1 2022 revenues of $17.8 billion, and $2.26 in earnings per share.
Tesla (TSLA) has released its financial results and shareholders letter for the first quarter of 2022 after market close today. We are updating this post with all the details from the financial results, shareholders’ letter, and the conference call later tonight. Refresh for the latest information. Yesterday, we posted our Tesla Q1 2022 earnings preview with Wall Street expectations and crowdsourced expectations. The Wall Street consensus for this quarter was $17.659 billion in revenue and earnings of $2.26 per share. The expectations represent a massive year-over-year increase after Tesla achieved a new record for deliveries with over 310,000 deliveries during the quarter. Tesla released the results today and beat Wall Street expectations on both revenue and earnings with $18,756 billion in revenue and $3.22 per share (non-GAAP) during the first quarter of 2022. Tesla’s stock (TSLA) was up by as much as 4% in aftermarket trading after investors learned of the results. Here’s Tesla’s financial summary from the quarterly results (last quarter in red): The automaker managed to increase operating income to $3.6 billion during the quarter. Probably the most impressive metric is Tesla achieving 32.9% GAAP Automotive gross margin in the quarter. That’s despite supply chain issues and increasing costs, but Tesla has been known to quickly pass those customers with price increases and it is being reflected in its margins.
Splatoon 3 also features a Story Mode where Agent 3 will have to face off against the Octarians. Learn the secrets behind Alterna, the Fuzzy Ooze, and how they will lead into the "Return of the Mammalians.” The co-op mode Salmon Run also makes its return where you'll have to team up and fend off waves of dangerous Salmonid bosses!   Latest News and Events Pokemon Splatfest Dates and Time Updated 10/9/2022 Splatoon 3 is celebrating the upcoming release of Pokemon Scarlet and Violet! Read on to learn the dates and time of the upcoming Pokemon Splatfest Available Platforms Updated 9/10/2022 Splatoon 3 will be released exclusively for the Nintendo Switch on September 9, 2022! Release Date Countdown Updated 9/14/2022 Splatoon 3 will release on September 9, 2022. See more details on its release and a countdown to its release date! Splatoon 3 Direct Summary Updated 9/27/2022 The Splatoon 3 Direct will came out on August 10, 2022. See all the new features introduced in the direct! Splatfest World Premiere Guide Updated 8/31/2022 Splatfest World Premiere is a limited-time event available in the demo for Splatoon 3. Find out how to download the demo and all the contents included!
When does Splatoon 3 come out? Here's what you need to know. When is the Splatoon 3 release date? And what precise time does the game come out in the UK? Those questions now have answers, and those answers won't keep you waiting too long. The third game in this paint-fighting franchise has been hotly-anticipated for quite some time now, and you can check out our Splatoon 3 preview to see what we thought after a hands-on session at Nintendo HQ (spoiler alert, we liked it). Or if you fancy yourself as a truly hardcore Splatoon fan, don't forget there's a special edition Splatoon 3 version of the Nintendo Switch OLED console. (It's available from Amazon for £319.99 if you want to take a look at it.) We played Splatoon 3 on an OLED Switch during our preview session. And as we wrote at the time, "It looked great! The colours really popped and it was still easy to follow the action as we went for a couple more rounds of family-friendly fun." And if you're ready to start playing yourself, read on! The Splatoon 3 release date will take place on Friday 9th September 2022. The game has been hotly anticipated for quite some time now, and we're very much looking forward to seeing it out in the world being devoured by fans. Bring it on!
15][16] The combined entity raised $125 million of new equity funding and received $350 million in credit led by JPMorgan.[17]  In December 2021, amid financial shortcomings following the merger, Jahm Najafi's Najafi Companies announced that it had reached an agreement to acquire STX Entertainment from ErosSTX for $173 million.[18] However, in late January 2022, Lionsgate also emerged as a potential suitor, looking to absorb either part or whole of STX, but the deal was later rejected, leaving only Najafi as a potential suitor.[19][20] In April 2022, Najafi Companies completed its acquisition of STX Entertainment. Eros Media World will retain a 15% non-voting stake in the company.[21][22] In July 2022, shortly after STX's motion picture chairman Adam Fogelson departed for the studio, Deadline reported that STX was in talks with Lionsgate over a potential film distribution deal.[23] Shortly after, it was reported that STX Entertainment's U.K. offices, including the London office housing STXinternational's headquarters, were gradually shutting down.[24] Following the departure of STXinternational head John Friedberg to join Black Bear Pictures' international division, it was announced the latter company was nearing a deal with STX to handle part of its slate internationally.
STX Entertainment is an American entertainment and media company. Founded in March 2014 by film producer Robert Simonds, the studio produces film, television, and digital media projects.  In April 2020, STX announced that it would merge with the Indian studio Eros International plc. The merger was completed in July 2020, and STX became a division of ErosSTX. In December 2021, Jahm Najafi announced his intention to acquire STX from the merged company for $173 million–a sale completed in April 2022. Eros remains a minority, non-voting shareholder.[1]  In 2012, Simonds and McGlashan began work on conceptualizing a media company based on the idea of producing medium-budget projects with a star attached, a method that had gone out of style with Hollywood studios. The conversation led to the launch of STX Entertainment in 2014, with the mission to finance, develop, produce, market, and distribute star-driven content around the world.[2][3] Investors in the company included Hony Capital, Tencent, PCCW, TPG Growth, and Liberty Global. Individual investors include Gigi Pritzker, Beau Wrigley, and Dominic Ng.[4][5][6]  In September 2017, it was reported that STX was considering an initial public offering on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange (SEHK).
Salt Lake City, UT—The Hatch Foundation sadly announces the passing of Senator Orrin G. Hatch—the Chairman Emeritus of the Hatch Foundation, former President Pro Tempore of the United States Senate, and longest-serving Senator in Utah history (1977-2019). Senator Hatch passed away at 5:30 p.m. on Saturday, April 23, 2022 in Salt Lake City, Utah, surrounded by family. Upon the Senator’s passing, the Hatch Foundation issued the following statements:  “Senator Orrin G. Hatch personified the American Dream,” said Matt Sandgren, Executive Director of the Hatch Foundation. “Born the son of a carpenter and plaster lather, he overcame the poverty of his youth to become a United States Senator. With the hardships of his upbringing always fresh in his mind, he made it his life’s mission to expand freedom and opportunity for others—and the results speak for themselves. From tax and trade to religious liberty and healthcare, few legislators have had a greater impact on American life than Orrin Hatch. He was a profoundly positive influence in the lives of those he served, whether they were the constituents he helped over four decades of casework, the hundreds of interns he sponsored in both Utah and DC, or the robust network of Hatch staffers who carry on his legacy to this day. Senator Hatch touched the hearts of countless individuals, and I know I speak for all of them when I say he will be dearly missed.
He was first elected in 1976 and announced his retirement in January 2018. More from NBC NewsFrance's Marine Le Pen has American liberals worriedMigrants say treatment of Ukrainians at U.S.-Mexico border illustrates double standardSearch continues for soldier who jumped into Rio Grande in Texas to save migrants He referred to his past as an amateur boxer in making the announcement, saying in a video: "Every good fighter knows when to hang up the gloves. And for me that time is soon approaching." Hatch was born in Homestead Park, Pennsylvania, in 1934. Raised in what he's called "a ramshackle house" during the Great Depression, Hatch went on to serve as chairman of three different Senate committees and put his stamp on major pieces of legislation across the policy spectrum. Hatch graduated from Brigham Young University in 1959 with a bachelor's in history, and in 1969 moved to Utah. He is survived by his wife, Elaine, and their six children. Funeral arrangements will be announced at a later date, the Hatch Foundation said. Utah Gov. Spencer Cox tweeted that "Utah mourns with the Hatch family." "This breaks my heart. Abby and I are so grateful for the opportunities we had to spend time with this incredible public servant. He was always so kind and generous with his time and wisdom," Cox, a Republican, wrote. Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.
David Folkenflik       Chris Licht became CNN's chairman and CEO in May. A few months later, high-profile departures and arrivals may signal how he will lead the network. AILSA CHANG, HOST:  This week brought news of the death of CNN founding anchor Bernard Shaw, known for pursuing the news and avoiding flash. And in recent days, CNN's new leader has made moves that he says will return the cable channel closer to its news-driven roots. Some of his changes have sparked concerns inside and outside the network. And for more on that, we have NPR media correspondent David Folkenflik. Hey, David.DAVID FOLKENFLIK, BYLINE: Hey, Ailsa.CHANG: OK. So tell us, who is CNN's new CEO and chairman Chris Licht, and how does he want to reshape CNN exactly?FOLKENFLIK: Sure. Chris Licht came over after stints at CBS where he oversaw the Colbert "Late Show." And he had also been at CBS News, and before that, MSNBC. He's promising in this incarnation at CNN that he's going to make the channel less opinion driven, less perhaps focused on Donald Trump as the one true story that they really rode during the Trump era. This has been a passion of Discovery CEO David Zaslav and Discovery's biggest investor, John Malone. Let's not forget that they just took over Time Warner and CNN recently.
In the interim, Zaslav said the leadership team will be comprised of three veteran network executives: Amy Entelis, executive vice president of talent and content development; Virginia Moseley, executive vice president of editorial; and Eric Sherling, executive vice president of U.S. programming. Leavy will continue overseeing the company’s commercial activities.           “We have great confidence in this group and will fully support them until a new CEO is named,” Zaslav said in an emailed statement to CNN staff. “We are in good hands, allowing us to take the time we need to run a thoughtful and thorough search for a new leader.”           Licht’s brief and rocky tenure as the head of the network came after he found tremendous success in morning news, producing MSNBC’s “Morning Joe” before he revamped “CBS Sunday Morning.”           Most recently, before joining CNN, Licht led Colbert’s program while it became the highest-rated late-night show on television.           Licht was never able to recreate that magic at CNN, stumbling soon after taking the job and facing enormous criticism.           Licht’s first task was dismantling CNN+, which had been hailed by CNN’s previous leadership as the network’s streaming future. Staffers knew that the decision to axe the streamer wasn’t Licht’s own decision, but, nevertheless, the shuttering of the much-hyped service dealt him a difficult opening hand.           Employees, however, kept an open mind.
French polling agencies are projecting that centrist incumbent Emmanuel Macron will win France’s presidential runoff Sunday, beating far-right rival Marine Le Pen in a tight race that was clouded by the Ukraine war and saw a surge in support for extremist ideas. (AP Photo/Francois Mori) Far-right leader Marine Le Pen smiles as she leaves after speaking after the early result projections of the French presidential election runoff were announced in Paris, Sunday, April 24, 2022. French polling agencies are projecting that centrist incumbent Emmanuel Macron will win France’s presidential runoff Sunday, beating far-right rival Marine Le Pen in a tight race that was clouded by the Ukraine war and saw a surge in support for extremist ideas. (AP Photo/Francois Mori) Far-right leader Marine Le Pen speaks after the early result projections of the French presidential election runoff were announced in Paris, Sunday, April 24, 2022. French polling agencies are projecting that centrist incumbent Emmanuel Macron will win France’s presidential runoff Sunday, beating far-right rival Marine Le Pen in a tight race that was clouded by the Ukraine war and saw a surge in support for extremist ideas. (AP Photo/Francois Mori) Supporters of French President Emmanuel Macron celebrate reports of his victory Sunday, April 24, 2022 in Paris.
79][80][81] The projections, based on actual ballot papers, also showed that 28% of registered voters did not show up to the second round,[82] making it the lowest turnout since 1969.[83] Official results showed that the turnout was 71.99%, with over 13 million abstentions in the second round, in addition to over 8.6% of ballots cast being blank or invalid (a marked increase over the first round).[77]  Simplified 2022 French presidential election's first round map  Map of which candidate placed second in every department during the first round  2022 French presidential election's first round in Petite Couronne by commune  Results of the first round by parliamentary constituency  Results of the first round by municipality  First-place candidate by country (Overseas French) during the first round  Simplified 2022 French presidential election's second round map  Results of the second round by parliamentary constituency  Results of the second round by municipality  The New York Times commented that the race was much closer than in 2017, when Macron won 66.1% of the vote to Le Pen's 33.9%, but that Macron's margin was wider than expected prior to the election.[85] Le Pen conceded defeat minutes after the estimated results were released,[83] but still called the outcome a victory for her political movement and for the upcoming parliamentary elections.
With iPhone 14 Pro, we’re entering the 48 megapixel era of iPhone photography. If it was mere detail or pixels, it would mark a step towards the cameras from the Radio Shack ad.  But what Apple has delivered in the iPhone 14 Pro is a camera that performs in all ways closer to a ‘proper’ camera than any phone ever has. At times, it can capture images that truly render unlike a phone camera — instead, they are what I would consider a real photo, not from a phone, but from a camera.  That’s a huge leap for all of us with an iPhone in our pocket.  Begin typing your search above and press return to search.   Press Esc to cancel.
This is our deep dive into iPhone 14 Pro — not the phone, the iPod, or the internet communicator — but the camera.  We previously took a look at the technical readout of the iPhone 14 Pro, offering us a chance to look at the camera hardware changes. Our key takeaway was that there are indeed some major changes, even if just on paper. The rear camera bump is almost all-new: the iPhone 14 Pro gains larger sensors in its ultra-wide and main (wide) cameras, but Apple also promises leaps in image quality through improved software processing and special silicon. However, what caught everyone’s eye first was the opener of Apple’s presentation of iPhone 14 Pro: a striking visual change. The iPhone’s recognizable screen cutout or ‘notch’ had all but disappeared, tucking its camera and sensor hardware into a small yet dynamic ‘island’. The user interface adapts around it; growing and shrinking with the screen cutout in an absolute feat of design. What’s more impressive to us, however, was miniaturizing the complex and large array of sensors and camera needed for Face ID. While the large cameras protruding ever-further from the rear of our iPhones capture our attention first — and will certainly get the most attention in this review, as well — the front-facing camera in the iPhone 14 Pro saw one of the biggest upgrades in recent memory, with its sensor, lens and software processing seeing a significant overhaul.
Now it's launched the program, it can tell any court in the land that it is providing every possible tool —  and doing so for a $49/week rental fee, including shipping. Only, that isn't $49 per week for however long you need to study the 80+ pages of repair manuals available on the new service site. It is $49 for one week and only one week —  or in practice, probably not quite even that. Instead, you have to drop the kit off at a UPS store "by day 7." If you fail to do so, "you will be charged a fee and a tax," though Apple does not specify how much that will amount to. It does say that at point of rental, it will put a temporary authorization on your credit card to cover the full replacement value of the tools. Again, Apple does not say how much that is —  partly because it varies, there are customized repair toolkits for different models. Confusingly, Apple's listings for the different toolkits don't entirely tally with its listings for each tool you can buy separately. There are some in the kit that don't appear to be listed separately, while there are some separate ones that are not in the kit. However, counting only the tools that are present in the iPhone SE toolkit —  the smallest kit available —  then the kit's contents are worth around $914.
Unless you want to cheat and use the cases’ wheels, which I’m thrilled to report don’t cost $700 extra. What’s inside these beefy kits? The first case for iPhone 12 and iPhone 13 repairs includes a “Heated Display Removal Fixture” and a “Heated Display Pocket,” a pair of technical devices that would cost roughly $350 to buy separately. In the other case are various parts, including battery and display presses, a repair tray, torque drivers, screw bits, and adhesive covers. You can find a full list in the Q&A section of the Tool Kit Rental page.  But what if I just need one torque driver, and I don’t want to buy it to keep? I guess I’ll have to hit the gym so I can carry all of that extra gear. In all seriousness, I’m eager to see what’s included in the rental kits for Mac repairs once Apple adds laptops and desktops to its self-service repair program later this year. Heft aside, the rental service seems like a legitimately great way to save money on genuine components most people don’t have in their toolbox. If only you could rent just the specific tools you need individually, too. And if only Apple’s new right-to-repair initiative supported older iPhone models—you know, the ones most in need of repairs or replacement parts.
For this reason, guests must abide by the no phone (and, therefore, no social media) policy. However, you can see exclusive photos from inside the 2023 Met Gala here and catch a glimpse of the table settings, menu, and decor. Kendall Jenner also gave us a behind the scenes look at the Met Gala through her camera in 2021. The event usually involves a high-profile performer (like Rihanna or Justin Bieber). This year, Lizzo shut down the gala with her shimmering, surprise performance. And guests always explore the exhibition before sitting down together for dinner.  This content can also be viewed on the site it originates from. The Met Gala takes place at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City on the first Monday in May each year (with the exception of the 2021 event, which took place in September due to COVID-19 restrictions). Guests attending the Met Gala typically stay in hotels nearby, congregating at a few celebrity-favorite spots. This year, the Mark Hotel was a prime location for celeb-spotting; see our photos from inside its halls. Until the evening before the event, the guest list is top secret. But some of the biggest names in the business regularly attend—from Beyoncé and Lady Gaga to Madonna and Rihanna. More often than not, designers attend with their muses: think Marc Jacobs and Kate Moss, or Nicolas Ghesquière and Emma Stone.
To revist this article, visit My Profile, then View saved stories. To revist this article, visit My Profile, then View saved stories. To revist this article, visit My Profile, then View saved stories. To revist this article, visit My Profile, then View saved stories. By Vogue Last night, on Monday, May 1, the 2023 Met Gala took place. This year’s Costume Institute exhibition, “Karl Lagerfeld: A Line of Beauty,” celebrates the full work and life of Karl Lagerfeld, so the dress code was, fittingly, “in honor of Karl.” As Lagerfeld designed for many houses—including his eponymous brand, Patou, Balmain, Chloé, Fendi, and Chanel—attendees had no shortage of inspiration.  Below, everything you need to know about the 2023 Met Gala.  The 2023 Met Gala took place on Monday, May 1 in New York City. It celebrated the opening of the Costume Institute exhibition “Karl Lagerfeld: A Line of Beauty.”  Fans followed all the action on Vogue’s livestream. If you missed the night-of action, you can catch catch a replay. The red carpet was live-streamed on Vogue.com and was also broadcast live across our digital platforms (as well as on Instagram, Facebook, and Twitter).
Saturday, June 10, 2023  Keep track of all the 2022/23 Champions League scores and results. Keep track of all the 2022/23 Champions League scores and results. The 2022/23 UEFA Champions League season kicked off with the start of the group stage on 6 September and concluded with the final in Istanbul on 10 June 2023. Here's a full rundown of this season's results. Saturday 10 JuneMan City 1-0 Inter Tuesday 9 MayReal Madrid 1-1 Man City Wednesday 10 MayAC Milan 0-2 Inter Tuesday 16 MayInter 1-0 AC Milan (agg: 3-0) Wednesday 17 MayMan City 4-0 Real Madrid (agg: 5-1) No more away goals rule There was a rule change ahead of 2021/22: ties level after the second leg will go to extra time and a penalty shoot-out if required, irrespective of the number of away goals a team has scored.
The 2022–23 UEFA Champions League was the 68th season of Europe's premier club football tournament organised by UEFA, and the 31st season since it was renamed from the European Champion Clubs' Cup to the UEFA Champions League.  The final was played at the Atatürk Olympic Stadium in Istanbul, Turkey, on 10 June 2023.[3] The stadium was originally appointed to host the 2020 UEFA Champions League final, but both this and the 2021 editions, which had been subsequently re-allocated to the Atatürk, were moved due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The 2023 final was contested by English club Manchester City and Italian club Inter Milan, with the former winning 1–0 via a second-half goal by Rodri, who was named man of the match by UEFA. For Manchester City, this was their first-ever European Cup, and first European trophy since 1970. Having earlier won the Premier league and FA Cup titles, they achieved a unique continental treble.[4][5] As winners, Manchester City earned the right to play against Sevilla, the winners of the 2022–23 UEFA Europa League, in the 2023 UEFA Super Cup, as well as qualifying for both the 2023 and 2025 FIFA Club World Cups in Saudi Arabia and the United States, respectively.
The 2021-22 NBA Finals are set to begin on Thursday, June 2 between the Golden State Warriors and Boston Celtics. The full NBA Finals schedule is below. To view the postseason bracket, visit Yahoo Sports' NBA scoreboard page. Game 1: Celtics at Warriors, Thursday, June 2, 9 p.m. ET (ABC) Game 2: Celtics at Warriors, Sunday, June 5, 8 p.m. ET (ABC) Game 3: Warriors at Celtics, Wednesday, June 8, 9 p.m. ET (ABC) Game 4: Warriors at Celtics, Friday, June 10, 9 p.m. ET (ABC) Game 5: Celtics at Warriors, Monday, June 13, 9 p.m. ET (ABC)* Game 6: Warriors at Celtics, Thursday, June 16, 9 p.m. ET (ABC)* Game 7: Celtics at Warriors, Sunday, June 19, 8 p.m. ET (ABC)* * — if necessary All NBA Finals games between the Warriors and Celtics will be televised on ABC. Per BetMGM, the betting favorite to win the 2021-22 NBA championship are the Warriors at -160 followed by the Celtics (+125), as of May 29. The top six seeds in each conference were determined at the conclusion of the regular season. The final two seeds were determined through the play-in tournament.
The 2022 NBA playoffs was the postseason tournament of the National Basketball Association's 2021–22 season. The playoffs began on April 16 and ended on June 16 with the conclusion of the 2022 NBA Finals. The playoffs also returned to its normal April–June schedule for the first time since 2019, before the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in two postponements in 2020 and 2021.  Eight teams from each conference participated in the playoffs. The top six teams in each conference, based on winning percentage, directly qualified for the playoffs; the seeding order of those teams was also based on winning percentage. If two or more teams had the same record, standard NBA tiebreaker rules were used.  The NBA Board of Governors approved a format for the 2021–22 season to have a play-in tournament involving the teams ranked 7th through 10th in each conference. The 7th place team and 8th place team participated in a "double-chance" game, with the winner advancing to the playoffs as the 7-seed. The loser then played the winner of the elimination game between the 9th place and 10th place teams to determine the playoff's 8-seed. The NBA's regular playoff format then proceeded as normal.[12]  Each conference's bracket was fixed with no reseeding.
Submit     Δ  		Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.	 Can a “Squid Game” reality series turn around Netflix’s fading fortunes? The embattled streamer has announced they’re creating a real-life version of the gory South Korean survival show — with production slated to take place in the UK early next year.  “Squid Game: The Challenge” is being billed as “the biggest reality competition series ever created” and will feature 456 contestants battling it out for a whopping $4.56 million in prize money.  According to a press release put out by Netflix on Tuesday, the staggering sum will be the largest cash prize ever offered on reality television.  “‘Squid Game’ took the world by storm with [director] Hwang Dong-hyuk’s captivating story and iconic imagery,” Netflix VP Brandon Rieg said in the release. “We’re grateful for his support as we turn the fictional world into reality in this massive competition and social experiment.” Casting is currently open to English-language speakers over the age of 21 at SquidGameCasting.com. The reality show will feature 10 episodes and production is expected to take place over four weeks.  The original “Squid Game” — which was released on Netflix last September — revolved around a contest whereby 456 cash-strapped contestants risked their lives to play a series of deadly children’s games for a $36 million prize.
“Fans of the drama series are in for a fascinating and unpredictable journey as our 456 real world contestants navigate the biggest competition series ever, full of tension and twists, with the biggest ever cash prize at the end."    The 10-episode competition series is a co-production between Studio Lambert (The Circle) and The Garden (24 Hours in A&E), part of ITV Studios, and it will be filmed in the UK. Stephen Lambert, Tim Harcourt, and Toni Ireland from Studio Lambert and John Hay, Nicola Hill, and Nicola Brown from The Garden will serve as executive producers.    The program will mimic the scripted series, in which a group of people with debts to pay compete in versions of childhood games to win money as super-rich VIPs watch. The game will challenge players’ strategy, alliances and character, as contestants are eliminated around them.    The scripted drama Squid Game holds the record as Netflix’s most popular series of all time, with over 1.65 billion view hours in the first 28 days after its September 2021 premiere. Download the Mint app and read premium stories Log in to our website to save your bookmarks. It'll just take a moment. You are just one step away from creating your watchlist! Oops! Looks like you have exceeded the limit to bookmark the image. Remove some to bookmark this image. Your session has expired, please login again. You are now subscribed to our newsletters.
16] At least three new heroes were announced to be added to the roster, including Sojourn, a Canadian Overwatch officer, Junker Queen, the ruler of Junkertown, and Kiriko, the protector of Kanezaka.[17][18]  Overwatch 2 runs on an upgraded version of the original game's engine which allows for larger map sizes to better support the new story-based player versus environment (PvE) elements.[12] Additionally, all of the existing heroes received visual redesigns for Overwatch 2, although Blizzard did not expect every hero to have their redesigns finished when the game launched. Twelve of the existing 31 redesigns were completed at the time of Overwatch 2's reveal.[17]  Overwatch 2 was released for Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Windows, Xbox One, and Xbox Series X/S in early access on October 4, 2022.[18] Kaplan stated when the game was announced that they were more concerned about quality of the product than timeliness of the release.[19][20] Investor documents released in November 2021 reported that the initial 2022 release window was delayed to at least 2023, intended for "giving the teams some extra time to complete production and continue growing their creative resources to support the titles after launch".[21] Kaplan anticipated that Overwatch and Overwatch 2 will ultimately merge into a single product to avoid having any engine differences affecting player experience.
All you need to know about the arrival of Overwatch 2. Overwatch 2 has finally landed, following the original Overwatch shutting down. The highly anticipated sequel has brought significant changes to the game, including a free-to-play model, a sizeable team update, a whole bunch of new heroes, and much more. Those who pre-loaded the game will have already got themselves well acquainted with the new and improved features, but if you're only just getting that battle pass loaded, or want to gain a better understanding of just how you can make the most of Overwatch 2, read on. The Overwatch 2 release date was 4th October 2o22, as developers confirmed well in advance. Although the game is free-to-play, players also have the option to buy the Watchpoint Pack for £34.99 - it's available on the Xbox, PlayStation and Battle.net websites - if they want to secure some special skins, in-game currency and more. Read more on Overwatch 2: The UK launch time for Overwatch 2 was 8pm BST on 4th October, the developers from Blizzard confirmed ahead of time. Players in Britain should've been able able to jump into the new game during the evening on Tuesday, then, although there was apparently quite a lot of strain on the servers.
Denmark’s Jonas Vingegaard (Jumbo-Visma) defended his place atop the general classification of the 2022 Tour de France, finishing Stage 14 alongside his biggest rival, Slovenia’s Tadej Pogačar (UAE Team Emirates), the Tour’s two-time defending champion. The two remain first- and second-overall, separated by 2:22. Great Britain’s Geraint Thomas (INEOS Grenadiers) held onto his third-place position, despite losing 17 seconds to Vingegaard and Pogačar at the end of the stage.  Australia’s Michael Matthews (Team BikeExchange-Jayco) took a fantastic stage win, the fourth of his career. Riding with determination after several near-misses so far in this year’s Tour, the 31-year-old joined the day’s big breakaway, initiated the winning move in the stage’s final hour, dropped his two breakaway companions on the tough final climb, and was caught and gapped by Italy’s Alberto Bettiol (EF Education-EasyPost) midway up the ascent. But the Australian kept himself in contention, catching and then passing Bettiol while cresting the summit to win the stage—almost five years to the day after taking his last Tour de France stage victory. Bettiol finished second, and France’s Thibaut Pinot (Groupama-FDJ) was third. Who’s Really Winning the Tour?
The Tour now takes a day off to travel back to France, with van Aert leading the Tour’s General Classification by 7 seconds over Belgium’s Yves Lampaert (Quick-Step Alpha Vinyl) and 14 seconds over Slovenia’s Tadej Pogačar (UAE Team Emirates). The next three stages suit the Belgian’s talents, so there’s a good chance that he’ll hold the Tour’s yellow jersey for a few more days. Who’s really winning the Tour? A relatively peaceful stage was interrupted by a large crash with about 10km to-go, emphasizing how important it is to stay as close to the front as possible at the end of these early stages.  Luckily, most of the Tour’s GC contenders managed to avoid losing time, with the exception of Colombia’s Rigoberto Uran (EF Education-EasyPost), who was held up by a crash for the second day in row and this time was unable to rejoin the leaders. The 35-year-old lost 39 seconds by the finish, a tough blow to his chances of scoring a high finish in Paris. Who’s Winning the Tour? Belgium’s Wout van Aert (Jumbo-Visma) is the new overall leader of the 2022 Tour de France.
Apple today officially reported its earnings for the third fiscal quarter of 2022, covering the second calendar quarter and the months of April, May, and June. A lot of eyes are on Apple as concerns mount over an economic downturn in the United States. Here’s what the company reported today.  For Q3 2022, Apple reported revenue of $83.0 billion and a profit of $19.4 billion. Earnings-per-share hit $1.20 for the quarter.  For Q3 2022, analyst predictions for revenue varied; $79.26B at the low end to $88.41B at the high end. The average across 26 analysts, however, was $82.81 billion.  Apple had not provided any guidance for Q3 2022, citing ongoing supply chain issues and continued disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. In fact, the company had even warned that supply constraints would cost it somewhere in the range of $4 billion to $8 billion in revenue for the quarter.  For comparison’s sake, in the same quarter a year ago, Apple reported $81.43 billion in revenue and profit of $21.74 billion. It reported earnings-per-share of $1.30. These numbers were boosted heavily by pandemic-induced spending, driven by strong iPad and Mac revenue growth.  Apple no longer reports unit sales for any of its products but instead reports a breakdown of revenue by product category.
August 2023 Worldwide 2004 to 2023 The quarterly periods for Apple's fiscal year include the following: early October to late December of the previous year (first quarter), early January to late March of the stated year (second quarter), early April to late June of the stated year (3rd quarter) and early July to late September of the stated year (4th quarter).   Telecommunications Quarterly smartphone market share worldwide by vendor 2009-2023 Consumer Electronics Apple's revenue worldwide 2004-2022 Consumer Electronics Apple's revenue broken down by geographical region 2012-2023, by quarter Consumer Electronics Number of employees of Apple 2005-2022 To download this statistic in XLS format you need a Statista Account To download this statistic in PNG format you need a Statista Account To download this statistic in PDF format you need a Statista Account As a Premium user you get access to the detailed source references and background information about this statistic. As a Premium user you get access to background information and details about the release of this statistic. As soon as this statistic is updated, you will immediately be notified via e-mail. … to incorporate the statistic into your presentation at any time. You need at least a Starter Account to use this feature. You only have access to basic statistics.                                                                          This statistic is not included in your account. Business Solutions including all features.                   Overview                               Financials                               iPhone
Alex de Minaur defeated Jenson Brooksby in the final, 6–3, 6–3 to win the singles title at the 2022 Atlanta Open. It was de Minaur's second Atlanta title, the first being in 2019.  John Isner was the defending champion,[1] but lost in the quarterfinals to Brooksby.  The top four seeds received a bye into the second round.
The 2022 Atlanta Open was a professional tennis tournament played on hard courts. It was the 34th edition of the tournament, and part of the 2022 ATP Tour. It took place at Atlantic Station in Atlanta, United States between July 24 and 31, 2022.[1]  *per team  The following players received wildcards into the main draw:  The following players received entry from the qualifying draw:  The following players received entry as lucky losers:  The following pairs received wildcards into the doubles main draw:  The following pair received entry as alternates:
“Some of that was in Q1, but the majority of it will be in Q2 through 4. And I think if you want to think about it as somewhere, 250-ish a quarter,” she said. AWS segment sales for Q3 2022 increased 27 percent year-over-year to $20.5 billion, from $16.5 billion in Q3 2021. AWS’ operating income was $5.4 billion, compared with an operating income of $4.9 billion in the third quarter 2021. Sales were up from the previous quarter this year, but income was down slightly. Q2 2022 saw AWS post net sales of $19.7 billion for the quarter, and operating income of $5.7 billion. Q1 2022 sales and income were $18.44 billion and $6.5 billion respectively. The cloud giant looks likely to reach sales of $80 billion by the end of the next quarter. As a whole, the company saw Net sales increase 15 percent to $127.1 billion in the third quarter. Operating income decreased to $2.5 billion. The company saw $4.9 billion of operating income in third quarter 2021. Net income decreased to $2.9 billion.
June 30,     Six Months Ended  June 30,     2021     2022     2021     2022                               North America                 Net sales   $   67,550       $   74,430       $   131,916       $   143,674     Operating expenses     64,403         75,057         125,319         145,869     Operating income (loss)   $   3,147       $   (627   )     $   6,597       $   (2,195   )                   International                 Net sales   $   30,721       $   27,065       $   61,370       $   55,824     Operating expenses     30,359         28,836         59,756         58,876     Operating income (loss)   $   362       $   (1,771   )     $   1,614       $   (3,052   )                   AWS                 Net sales   $   14,809       $   19,739
Ben Johnson                   Published: Jul 29, 2022  Xenoblade Chronicles 3, developed by Monolith Soft, is out now on the Nintendo Switch. This is the fourth instalment in the much-loved Xenoblade series, and the trailer showcases lush landscapes, giant mechons, and grand drama. We love the game, as we explain in our Xenoblade Chronicles 3 review, so be sure to check it out if you’re interested.   With the Xenoblade Chronicles 3 release date set for July 29, it means the game is out now. It’s a bit of a blend of the two previous mainline entries, which could have interesting story implications. To learn more about the possibilities, check out our Xenoblade Chronicles 3 Noah, Xenoblade Chronicles 3 Mio, or Xenoblade Chronicles 3 characters guides to see what’s going on.    The last game in the series, Xenoblade Chronicles 2, came out back in 2017, the launch year for the Nintendo Switch. In terms of sales, it was very successful and was followed by a remaster of the original Xenoblade. Check out our Xenoblade Chronicles 3 trailers page to see if you can spot any clues as to how the stories tie together.
Xenoblade Chronicles 3[b] is a 2022 action role-playing game developed by Monolith Soft and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo Switch. It is an installment in the open-world Xenoblade Chronicles series, itself a part of the larger Xeno franchise. Xenoblade Chronicles 3 depicts the futures of the worlds featured in Xenoblade Chronicles (2010) and Xenoblade Chronicles 2 (2017) and concludes the trilogy's narrative.   The development team wanted to develop a story-driven game in the style of the first two entries in the series, while featuring content and combat from previous Xeno entries. The gameplay combines elements from the first and second entries. Like the first two entries, the game was localized by Nintendo of Europe.    Xenoblade Chronicles 3 takes place in Aionios, where two warring nations, Keves and Agnus, engage in perpetual war fought by soldiers with ten-year lifespans.  The story follows Noah and his two childhood friends, Eunie and Lanz, who are from Keves, and Mio and her two fellow servicemen, Sena and Taion, who are from Agnus. They gain the power of Ouroboros and decide to cooperate to find safety. Through this journey, they uncover the mystery behind the perpetual war and the true nature of their world.
Professor, Management and Organizational Studies, Huron University College, Western University      Kendra Coulter receives funding from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada and is a fellow of the Oxford Centre for Animal Ethics.  Western University provides funding as a member of The Conversation CA-FR. Western University provides funding as a member of The Conversation CA. View all partners It is a horse named Ghost who first signals that something is awry in the sky in Jordan Peele’s latest visually and thematically ambitious film Nope. OJ (Daniel Kaluuya) is the head wrangler of Heywood Hollywood Horses, an intergenerational, Black-owned and now struggling ranch that specializes in training horses for the big screen.  But it is his sister Emerald (Keke Palmer) who notices that Ghost, one of their family’s veteran equine actors, is unexpectedly standing in an outdoor pen staring out into space, his light grey fur as sublime as the moonlight. Ghost jumps the fence and gallops away, saying “nope” in his own way. As a subversive Western science fiction kaleidoscope, Nope challenges viewers to consider technology, surveillance, other worldly life and the making of spectacle through different lenses — including the eyes of animals. The result is an unsettling view that exposes core ethical questions about animals’ work in films, including in Nope itself.
(Keith David), killed in a freak accident in which debris rained down from the sky, they’re running into hard times. Plus, the advent of CGI means the movies just don’t require real horses on set the way they used to. Alistair Haywood’s character is Peele’s invention, though the film in which he rode a horse, made by Eadweard Muybridge in 1878, is real. Actually, there were multiple films; the one that Peele intertwines Nope with involves a horse named Annie G. ridden by an unidentified but definitely Black jockey. History remembers the horse but has lost track of the jockey’s identity, which is sort of Nope’s point. In one scene, Emerald proudly announces on a movie set that “since the moment pictures could move, we got skin in the game.” But nobody remembers Haywood unless she reminds them. In any case, the Haywood ranch is just up the road from Jupiter’s Claim, and OJ’s been selling horses to owner Ricky “Jupe” Park (Steven Yeun) to keep the ranch afloat. Jupiter’s Claim is a goofy cartoonish amusement park lightly modeled on a fun-loving town from some old Western — and those in turn, let’s remember, were very lightly modeled on the actual West.
Neal Charles LemleinSept. 29, 1950 - July 22, 2022Neal Charles Lemlein was interested in people and they responded. “He was probablyone of the most charismatic people I’ve met,” Ryan, his son, says.Neal died July 22 in Aurora, Colorado, of kidney cancer. He was 71. A small privateservice will be held.He is survived by his wife, Patricia (Patti) Lewis Lemlein, of Erie, Colorado, Ryan(Jessica DiCroce) and daughter, Alexandra, both of Denver, his mother, Rhoda Lemlein,San Diego, and sister, Dian Robertson, of Columbus, Ohio. His father, Leonard Lemlein,died in 1996.Neal grew up in White Plains, New York. “He had this amazing career,” says Alexandra,recalling that his professional life began when he took a job at Young & Rubicam, astoried Madison Avenue advertising agency, having graduated from Tulane University,obtained a master’s degree at New York University, and traveled for a prolonged spell inEurope in his long wild hair and a Fu Manchu moustache.Moving West, he rose in the entertainment industry, first in San Francisco and then inLos Angeles, steering marketing and media campaigns at ad agencies and studios forsome 200 films, in executive positions at CBS, Universal Studios and 20th Century Fox.
They movedbriefly to Boulder, Colorado, in 2006, moved back to LA six years later, and then, inretirement, Patti and Neal relocated to Erie in 2021.“Not everybody gets to have a great love,” Patti says. Theirs began long before datingapps when a mutual friend proposed they try a blind date. Patti still has the dress shewore, a teal blue polka dot silk Ellen Tracy.They met in a West Hollywood hangout and she liked him immediately. He seemedkind. He was smart, funny and good looking, with a ferocious pair of black eyebrows. Heasked if she’d like to meet his dog, Murray.Thirty six years later, as they waited for one of Neal’s medical appointments, a staffmember told them that she’d noticed they were always together.“What’s your secret?” she asked.“She’s my best friend,” Neal told her.If you'd like to make a donation in memory of Neal please consider the Kidney Cancer Association: https://myimpact.kidneycancer.org/To send flowers to the family or plant a tree in memory of Neal Charles Lemlein please visit our Tribute Store.
Here's a guide to that cast and characters they play in Carter, and what they've been in before.  Heading up the cast is Joo Won as Carter Lee, later revealed as also going by the name Michael Bane. The film begins with Carter waking up in a blood-soaked bed in Seoul with a cross-shaped scar on the back of his head and no memory of who he is. With a premise similar to Hardcore Henry, Carter also features video game logic in its action sequences. Joo Won is a South Korean actor best known for his roles in television, including the main protagonist in Good Doctor, which is played by Freddie Highmore in the American adaptation.  Kim Jong-hyeok is a North Korean General who meets Carter during his mission, providing him transport out of South Korea. General Kim is played by Lee Sung-jae, a veteran South Korean actor with credits in TV and film. Lee’s most notable credit is Barking Dogs Never Bite, a 2000 dark comedy film that was the directorial debut of Bong Joon-ho, whose film Parasite won the 2020 Oscar for Best Picture.  The young girl cured of the virus and carrying the life-saving antibodies is Jung Ha-na (Kim Bo-min). Carter is tasked with rescuing Ha-na and bringing her to a North Korean facility where the production of a vaccine can be developed.
Netflix’s action film Carter features a cast of South Korean and American actors. Here are the roles they play and where you may know them from.  Netflix’s sci-fi action film Carter is a South Korean production with an international cast recognizable from previous roles in TV and film. Following the success of the first season of Squid Game, which will return for season 2 on the streaming service, Netflix has increased content from South Korea. Carter landed at number two worldwide in its debut weekend, featuring non-stop action and performances from both South Korean and American actors. The plot for Carter takes place during a deadly pandemic that has already devastated the United States and North Korea and threatens to do the same to South Korea, if efforts aren’t taken to prevent it from spreading. Patients suffering from the virus display zombie-like behavior, but the key to a solution lies in the antibodies of a young child. Agents from each country battle for control of the cure in a real-time race for survival. Related: Everything We Know About Marvel Zombies Using hidden cuts similar to 1917, the entire plot of Carter is presented as one continuous shot. Director Jung Byung-gil implemented this technique for the first-person opening scene of his last film The Villainess, but Carter reaches ambitious new heights with a dizzying array of real-time action sequences. Along with the cinematographic efforts made to achieve this approach, it also provided unique challenges for the cast of actors.
In just a week of its launch, Meta’s Blender Bot 3 has turned on its own creator and is already spewing marginally racist comments.  The third iteration of Meta’s AI chatbot Blender Bot and the company’s answer to Google’s LaMDA has taken a rather unpleasant but not unexpected turn. Just a week after its launch, Meta’s Blender Bot 3 has turned on its creator and is already spewing marginally racist comments. Blender Bot 3 was released by the social networking giant on Friday, August 5. The conversational AI is designed to converse with humans about “nearly any topic.” Like Blender Bot 2, the latest upgrade also features the ability to browse the internet, is trained on the OPT-175B language model (which is 58x the size of Blender Bot 2), and has long-term memory.  It also eliminates the limitations such as forgetfulness (which surprisingly makes machine learning models efficient when not used in chatbots). It has self-learning capabilities that allow it “to improve its conversational skills and safety through feedback from people who chat with it, focusing on helpful feedback while avoiding learning from unhelpful or dangerous responses.” Well, yes and no. While it is entirely plausible that the underlying AI tech helps it to ‘learn,’ it seems like Blender Bot 3 cannot differentiate between what is acceptable and what is not. At least that’s what its recent responses to some people conveyed.
The bot is a work in progress that will build its capabilities based on conversations with humans and through their feedback. Meta has built-in thumbs up and thumbs down icons within the chat window for the same. BlenderBot 3 delivers a 31% better performance in terms of conversational tasks and is twice as knowledgeable compared to its predecessor, Blender Bot 2. The latest chatbot is also factually incorrect 47% less of the time. On topical questions, Blender Bot 3 was more up-to-date 82% of the time and more specific 76% of the time compared to GPT3. Results of Blender Bot 3 comparison with existing openly available open-domain dialogue models judged by human evaluators during short conversations: Well, it is safe to say that they haven’t been any better. Released in 2016, Microsoft’s Tay AI chatbot quickly turned racist, floating conspiracy theories after interaction with Twitter users. Tay denied the Holocaust, made other offensive remarks and was shut down in just 48 hoursOpens a new window  of its release. Microsoft’s Zo also met a similar fate when it resorted to making offensive religious comments. Google has two cutting-edge conversational AIs. Meena hasn’t generated a similar controversy because it cannot perform web searches.
By  James Vincent, a senior reporter who has covered AI, robotics, and more for eight years at The Verge. Meta’s AI research labs have created a new state-of-the-art chatbot and are letting members of the public talk to the system in order to collect feedback on its capabilities.  The bot is called BlenderBot 3 and can be accessed on the web. (Though, right now, it seems only residents in the US can do so.) BlenderBot 3 is able to engage in general chitchat, says Meta, but also answer the sort of queries you might ask a digital assistant, “from talking about healthy food recipes to finding child-friendly amenities in the city.” BlenderBot 3 is designed to both shoot the breeze and answer questions like Google The bot is a prototype and built on Meta’s previous work with what are known as large language models or LLMS — powerful but flawed text-generation software of which OpenAI’s GPT-3 is the most widely known example. Like all LLMs, BlenderBot is initially trained on vast datasets of text, which it mines for statistical patterns in order to generate language. Such systems have proved to be extremely flexible and have been put to a range of uses, from generating code for programmers to helping authors write their next bestseller.
GPT3 and OPT-175B are working language models, intended to be used – among other things – for serious commercial enterprises. BlenderBot 3, though, is a bit of a laugh. Hence those open questions about safety. Within a few days of BlenderBot being online and ready to mingle (with Americans only, alas), users were posting some spicy examples of the chatbot’s output. The Wall Street Journal’s Jeff Horwitz found that the bot appeared to have been radicalised by Facebook into supporting Donald Trump as a three-term president: And into bringing antisemitic conspiracy theories up, unprompted: Renee DiResta of the Stanford Internet Observatory found that the bot would claim to be an a supporter of the German paramilitary organisation the Red Army Faction: Pranav Dixit of BuzzFeed News found the bot wants to send Zuckerberg to jail: The whole thing is most reminiscent of Tay, Microsoft’s AI-based learning chatbot, which was released in 2016 and promptly became a Hitler-loving Trump supporter: ‘Tay is designed to engage and entertain people where they connect with each other online through casual and playful conversation,’ Microsoft said. ‘The more you chat with Tay the smarter she gets.’ But it appeared on Thursday that Tay’s conversation extended to racist, inflammatory and political statements.
ChatGPT is a natural language processing tool driven by AI technology that allows you to have human-like conversations and much more with the chatbot. The language model can answer questions and assist you with tasks, such as composing emails, essays, and code. Also: How to use ChatGPT: What you need to know now It's currently open to use by the public for free because ChatGPT is in its research and feedback-collection phase. A paid subscription version called ChatGPT Plus launched at the beginning of February. ChatGPT was created by OpenAI, an AI and research company. The company launched ChatGPT on November 30, 2022.  Also: 7 advanced ChatGPT prompt-writing tips you need to know OpenAI is also responsible for creating DALL-E 2, a popular AI art generator, and Whisper, an automatic speech recognition system.  It's a big deal -- think internet-level disruption.  Sam Altman, OpenAI's chief, said on Twitter that ChatGPT had more than one million users in the first five days after it launched.  Also: GPT-4 is getting significantly dumber over time, according to a study According to analysis by Swiss bank UBS, ChatGPT is the fastest-growing 'app' of all time. The analysis estimates that ChatGPT had 100 million active users in January, only two months after its launch.
You can track the Android rollout here.   We’re starting to roll out custom instructions, giving you more control over ChatGPT’s responses. Set your preferences once, and they’ll steer future conversations. You can read more about custom instructions in the blogpost here.   Custom instructions is available to all Plus users and expanding to all users in the coming weeks.   To enable beta features: Click on 'Profile & Settings’ Select 'Beta features' Toggle on 'Custom instructions' To add your instructions: Click on your name Select ‘Custom instructions’ This feature is not yet available in the UK and EU.   We're doubling the number of messages ChatGPT Plus customers can send with GPT-4. Rolling out over the next week, the new message limit will be 50 every 3 hours.   We’re rolling out code interpreter to all ChatGPT Plus users over the next week.   It lets ChatGPT run code, optionally with access to files you've uploaded. You can ask ChatGPT to analyze data, create charts, edit files, perform math, etc.   We’ll be making these features accessible to Plus users on the web via the beta panel in your settings over the course of the next week.   To enable code interpreter: Click on your name Select beta features from your settings Toggle on the beta features you’d like to try We've learned that the browsing beta can occasionally display content in ways we don't want, e.g.
Generative Pre-trained Transformer 4 (GPT-4) is a multimodal large language model created by OpenAI, and the fourth in its numbered "GPT-n" series of GPT foundation models.[1] It was released on March 14, 2023, and has been made publicly available in a limited form via the chatbot product ChatGPT Plus (a premium version of ChatGPT), and with access to the GPT-4 based version of OpenAI's API being provided via a waitlist.[1] As a transformer based model, GPT-4 was pretrained to predict the next token (using both public data and "data licensed from third-party providers"), and was then fine-tuned with reinforcement learning from human and AI feedback for human alignment and policy compliance.[2]: 2   Observers reported the GPT-4 based version of ChatGPT to be an improvement on the previous (GPT-3.5 based) ChatGPT, with the caveat that GPT-4 retains some of the same problems.[3] Unlike the predecessors, GPT-4 can take images as well as text as input.[4] OpenAI has declined to reveal technical information such as the size of the GPT-4 model.[5]  OpenAI introduced the first GPT model (GPT-1) in 2018, publishing a paper called "Improving Language Understanding by Generative Pre-Training.
Sam Altman was interviewed recently for the StrictlyVC program, where he confirms that OpenAI is working on a video model, which sounds incredible but could also lead to serious negative outcomes. While the video part was not said to be a component of GPT-4, what was of interest and possibly related, is that Altman was emphatic that OpenAI would not release GPT-4 until they were assured that it was safe. The relevant part of the interview occurs at the 4:37 minute mark: The interviewer asked: “Can you comment on whether GPT-4 is coming out in the first quarter, first half of the year?” Sam Altman responded: “It’ll come out at some point when we are like confident that we can do it safely and responsibly. I think in general we are going to release technology much more slowly than people would like. We’re going to sit on it much  longer than people would like. And eventually people will be like happy with our approach to this. But at the time I realized like people want the shiny toy and it’s frustrating and I totally get that.” Twitter is abuzz with rumors that are difficult to confirm. One unconfirmed rumor is that it will have 100 trillion parameters (compared to GPT-3’s 175 billion parameters).
“Since we started iRobot, our team has been on a mission to create innovative, practical products that make customers’ lives easier, leading to inventions like the Roomba and iRobot OS,” said Colin Angle, chairman and CEO of iRobot. “Amazon shares our passion for building thoughtful innovations that empower people to do more at home, and I cannot think of a better place for our team to continue our mission. I’m hugely excited to be a part of Amazon and to see what we can build together for customers in the years ahead.” Amazon will acquire iRobot for $61 per share in an all-cash transaction valued at approximately $1.7 billion, including iRobot’s net debt. Completion of the transaction is subject to customary closing conditions, including approval by iRobot’s shareholders and regulatory approvals. On completion, Colin Angle will remain as CEO of iRobot.  About Amazon  Amazon is guided by four principles: customer obsession rather than competitor focus, passion for invention, commitment to operational excellence, and long-term thinking. Amazon strives to be Earth’s Most Customer-Centric Company, Earth’s Best Employer, and Earth’s Safest Place to Work. Customer reviews, 1-Click shopping, personalized recommendations, Prime, Fulfillment by Amazon, AWS, Kindle Direct Publishing, Kindle, Career Choice, Fire tablets, Fire TV, Amazon Echo, Alexa, Just Walk Out technology, Amazon Studios, and The Climate Pledge are some of the things pioneered by Amazon.
Su said it also illustrates the shortcomings of consumer robotics vendors like iRobot, which struggled to expand beyond a niche product and was in a “race-to-the-bottom” competition with Korean and Chinese manufacturers offering cheaper versions of a robotic vacuum. On Friday, iRobot reported its quarterly results. Revenue plunged 30% primarily on order reductions and delays, and the company announced it was laying off 10% of its workforce.  Amazon said it will acquire iRobot for $61 per share in an all-cash transaction that will include iRobot’s net debt. The company has total current debt of approximately $332.1 million as of July 2. The deal is subject to approval by shareholders and regulators. Upon completion, iRobot’s CEO, Colin Angle, will remain in his position. Noting that iRobot has been running its robotics platform on Amazon’s cloud service unit AWS for many years, Su said the acquisition could lead to more integration of Amazon speech recognition and other capabilities into vacuums. In afternoon trading, iRobot shares rose 19%. Amazon’s were down 1.7%. The deal comes as anti-monopoly advocates continue to raise concerns about Amazon’s increasing dominance. The purchase of iRobot is Amazon’s fourth-largest acquisition, led by its $13.7 billion deal to buy Whole Foods in 2017. Last month, the company said it would buy the primary care provider One Medical in a deal valued roughly at $3.
3] In November 2020, MLB announced the 2021 game date and that the contest would feature the originally planned participants, the White Sox and Yankees.[4]  The game is hosted in Dyersville, Iowa, near the filming location of the titular 1989 baseball movie. The field constructed for the movie, which has been operated as a tourist destination since 1989, could not be brought to MLB game standards without permanently altering major features of the property and destroying its movie authenticity, so it was decided to build a separate playing facility at a distance of approximately 500 ft (150 m) in the cornfields. The new field is in the property of the Ameskamp family, who used to own the left and center field of the 1988 Field of Dreams (the rest was owned by the Lansing family) before selling it to the Lansing family in 2007.  The design of the ballpark pays homage to the White Sox' home from 1910 to 1990, Comiskey Park, including the shape of the outfield and the bullpens beyond the center field fence. Windows were included in the design of the right field wall to show the cornfields beyond the ballpark and to provide views of the movie set.[5][1]  Following postponement of the originally scheduled game, the field remained fallow during the 2020 season.
30] Chicago catcher Willson Contreras rolled his ankle rounding second base in the third inning, but remained in the game.[31]  On April 21, 2022, Minor League Baseball (MiLB) announced the inaugural MiLB at Field of Dreams game, a High-A contest in Dyersville between teams of the Midwest League.[32] On August 9, the Quad Cities River Bandits hosted and defeated the Cedar Rapids Kernels, 7–2.[33] The teams used historical franchise names for the contest, Davenport Blue Sox and Cedar Rapids Bunnies, respectively.[32]  MLB will not host a game at the ballpark in 2023 due to construction around the site.[34] Future plans include converting the site into a youth baseball and softball complex that one day would also have a hotel.[35] Iowa Governor Kim Reynolds confirmed that there will be another round of public funding to build a permanent stadium at the site.[36] Former MLB player Frank Thomas, who is part of the group that owns the property, did not rule out the possibility of future MLB games at the site after 2023.[37]  In 2024, there will be a similar game between the San Francisco Giants and St. Louis Cardinals held at Rickwood Field in Alabama.[38]  Since its inception, the game has been broadcast by Fox as part of their Thursday Night Baseball telecasts.
Windows 11 22H2 will release on September 20, 2022, and here are all the details you need to know. Windows 11 version 22H2 (2022 Update) is the next major refresh of the Microsoft desktop operating system. Codenamed “Sun Valley 2,” the feature update will continue updating the desktop interface, bringing back previously removed features, and introducing new features and improvements. Although we are still days away from the release date, Microsoft is done adding the new features and changes for the Windows 11 2022 Update. The intended final version of the update is already available in the Release Preview Channel of the Windows Insider Program. This release will include new features like Live Captions and Voice Access. It will also introduce an updated version of File Explorer that brings support for tabs and a redesigned navigation pane, a new way to snap applications on the screen with drag and drop Snap layouts flyout, and redesigned version of Task Manager. Furthermore, you will find many visual updates for legacy elements and more. The final version of Windows 11 22H2 has been available since June 7, 2022, but only as a preview in the Release Preview Channel. The feature update is expected to launch on Tuesday, September 20, 2022 (the update is now live for everyone). The update will be offered as a free upgrade for computers already running the original version.
Windows 11 is a major release of the Windows NT developed by Microsoft that was released in October 2021. Starting with Windows 10, Microsoft described Windows as an "operating system as a service" that would receive ongoing updates to its features and functionality, augmented with the ability for enterprise environments to receive non-critical updates at a slower pace or use long-term support milestones that will only receive critical updates, such as security patches, over their five-year lifespan of mainstream support.  Windows Insider Preview builds are delivered to Insiders in four different channels. Insiders in the Dev and Canary Channel receive updates prior to those in the Beta Channel, but might experience more bugs and other issues. Insiders in the Release Preview Channel do not receive updates until the version is almost available to the public, but are comparatively more stable.  As with Windows 10 (since version 20H2), mainstream builds of Windows 11 are labeled "YYHX", with YY representing the two-digit year and X representing the half-year of planned release (for example, version 21H2 refers to builds which initially released in the second half of 2021).  The original version of Windows 11 (also known as version 21H2 and codenamed "Sun Valley") was released in October 2021.[1][2] It carries the build number 10.0.22000.
In a brief press release sent out this morning, AMD has announced that they will be delivering their eagerly anticipated Ryzen 7000 unveiling later this month as a live stream. In an event dubbed “together we advance_PCs”, AMD will be discussing the forthcoming Ryzen 7000 series processors as well as the underlying Zen 4 architecture and associated AM5 platform – laying the groundwork ahead of AMD’s planned fall launch for the Ryzen 7000 platform. The event is set to kick off on August 29th at 7pm ET (23:00 UTC), with CEO Dr. Lisa Su and CTO Mark Papermaster slated to present. AMD first unveiled their Ryzen 7000 platform and branding back at Computex 2022, offering quite a few high-level details on the forthcoming consumer processor platform while stating it would be launching in the fall. The new CPU family will feature up to 16 Zen 4 cores using TSMC's optimized 5 nm manufacturing process for the Core Complex Die (CCD), and TSMC’s 6nm process for the I/O Die (IOD). AMD has not disclosed a great deal about the Zen 4 architecture itself, though their Computex presentation has indicated we should expect a several percent increase in IPC, along with a further several percent increase in peak clockspeeds, allowing for a 15%+ increase in single-threaded performance.
When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works. Everything we know about AMD's new desktop processors Editor's Note: AMD unveiled a few new CPUs in the Ryzen 7000 line at CES 2023, most notably the Ryzen 7040, the first (and so far only) laptop CPU in the lineup -- and the first AMD laptop CPU to ship with onboard Ryzen AI tech. The AMD Ryzen 7000 desktop processors have arrived. AMD announced the pricing and availability of its upcoming Zen 4 architecture-based CPUs during the company's “Together we advance PCs” live stream in August 2022. As previously revealed during Computex 2022, the new chips will feature TSMC's 5-nanometer process and run on AMD's new AM5 platform. AMD released four Ryzen 7000 series CPUs on September 27, 2022. As it did with the previous Ryzen 5000 chips, the company plans to release the higher-end (i.e. more expensive) CPUs first and then follow up with more budget processors later this year. Prices for the initial crop of CPUs ranges from $299 to $699. Here's everything you need to know about the new AMD Ryzen 7000 processors. AMD’s Ryzen 7000 series processors will launch on September 27, 2022. The line will consist of four CPUs.
WOGA Gymnastics’ Konnor McClain (Las Vegas, Nev.) captured the senior women’s all-around title as competition concluded at the 2022 OOFOS U.S. Gymnastics Championships Saturday evening at Amalie Arena. © John Cheng  TAMPA, Fla. (August 21, 2022) – WOGA Gymnastics’ Konnor McClain (Las Vegas, Nev.) captured the senior women’s all-around title as competition concluded at the 2022 OOFOS U.S. Gymnastics Championships Saturday evening at Amalie Arena. Her combined eight-rotation 112.750 beat out all competition for the night’s biggest prize, and she added balance beam gold (28.900) along the way.  Shilese Jones (Auburn, Wash./Ascend Gymnastics Center) finished a close second with a 112.000, while Olympians Jordan Chiles (Spring, Texas/World Champions Centre) and Jade Carey (Phoenix, Ariz./Oregon State University) finished third (111.900) and fifth (110.900), respectively. Hill’s Gymnastics’ Kayla DiCello (Boyds, Md.) delivered a 110.950 to secure fourth. Jones shared the uneven bars title with her future Florida Gators teammate and World all-around silver medalist Leanne Wong (Overland Park, Kan./Great American Gymnastics Express), each scoring 28.
7][8]  In 2014, the top three finishers in the women's all-around were Simone Biles, Kyla Ross, and Maggie Nichols. It was Biles's second consecutive all-around title. In the individual events, Biles won on both vault and floor exercise, Ross won on balance beam, and Ashton Locklear won on uneven bars. In the men's all-around, the top three finishers were Sam Mikulak, John Orozco, and Jacob Dalton. It was Mikulak's second consecutive all-around title. In the individual events, Dalton won on floor exercise, Mikulak won on pommel horse, Brandon Wynn won on still rings, Donnell Whittenburg won on vault, Danell Leyva won on parallel bars, and Orozco won on high bar.  In 2015, the top three finishers in the women's all-around were Simone Biles, Maggie Nichols, and Aly Raisman. It was Biles's third consecutive all-around title, and she became the first female gymnast since Kim Zmeskal (1990-1991-1992) to win the all-around 3 consecutive times. In the individual events, Biles won on both vault and balance beam, Madison Kocian won on uneven bars, and Raisman won on floor exercise.
By  Emma Roth, a news writer who covers the streaming wars, consumer tech, crypto, social media, and much more. Previously, she was a writer and editor at MUO.  Tesla’s increasing the price of its Full-Self Driving (FSD) software to $15,000. In a post on Twitter, Tesla CEO Elon Musk announced that the new price will go into effect in North America starting September 5th, representing a $3,000 jump. Drivers who order a vehicle before September 5th won’t have to pay the newly-increased price, Musk says. The price hike comes as Tesla begins rolling out FSD beta 10.69 to drivers, a version Musk calls “a big step forward.” It’s still unclear whether Tesla plans on raising the price of its FSD subscription, which currently costs $199 per month. The FSD software lets drivers use Tesla’s advanced driving assistance system (ADAS), Autopilot, to navigate to and from specific destinations, among other driver-assist features. FSD doesn’t make a vehicle fully autonomous; it requires drivers to keep their hands on the wheel and pay attention to the road at all times. The price of Tesla’s FSD beta has slowly crept up over the years, and cost $5,000 upon launch.
But when Tesla started rolling out the FSD beta to a select group of customers in October 2020, it upped the price to $10,000. In September 2021, Tesla began opening the beta to more customers via a new “request” button before increasing the price to $12,000 earlier this year. In 2019, Musk called Tesla vehicles “appreciating assets,” meaning that they’ll increase in value as Tesla launches additional driver-assist features. Musk later claimed that “the value of FSD” could reach over $100,000 “as the software gets closer to full self-driving capability with regulatory approval.” Earlier this month, California’s Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) accused Tesla of making “untrue or misleading claims” about its vehicles’ self-driving capabilities. The DMV alleges that the names Autopilot and FSD, as well as the language Tesla uses to describe them, could deceive users into thinking that the vehicles can operate autonomously.  Last August, Senators Ed Markey (D-MA) and Richard Blumenthal (D-CT) asked the Federal Trade Commission to investigate the way Tesla advertises its FSD and Autopilot software. The two lawmakers later sent a letter to Musk to “express significant concerns” over Tesla’s driver-assist system, which Tesla responded to by saying its system can help customers “drive safer than the average driver in the U.S.
Traditionalists aren't ready to see a woman take the Iron Throne, but Rhaenyra is bound and determined to "create a new order" from the back of her dragon. Meanwhile, members of Houses Stark, Velaryon, Lannister, and Baratheon plot against those in power, but the Targaryens have unmatched firepower. Ready to get your dragon on? Buckle up for everything we know about the show thus far, including what we learned from House of the Dragon's Hall H panel at San Diego Comic-Con this year.   When Does House of the Dragon Premiere? House of the Dragon's ten episode season will begin on August 21, 2022. It'll go head-to-head with another fantasy juggernaut, Amazon's The Rings of Power, landing on September 2. Two fantasy series enter the streaming thunder-dome—who will win? August 21. #HouseoftheDragon pic.twitter.com/xH6T7b9sa9 What Did We Learn at House of the Dragon's Comic-Con presentation?  The House of the Dragon panel kicked off with the extended trailer for the series, which showed a whole lot of Game of Thrones-y antics: the (then-) latest and greatest battle for the Iron Throne, a longer tease of the battle for succession at the show's center, and a look at the time "when dragons ruled as one.
In February 2023, Bloys said it's "a good guess" that House of the Dragon won't be eligible for the 2024 Emmys, which means it will premiere after May 31, 2024. Summer or fall 2024 is looking like a good guess for the premiere date. We'll update this story as soon as we learn more. Emily Burack (she/her) is the news writer for Town & Country, where she covers entertainment, culture, the royals, and a range of other subjects. Before joining T&C, she was the deputy managing editor at Hey Alma, a Jewish culture site. Follow her @emburack on Twitter and Instagram.  The Summer I Turned Pretty S2 Episode Guide Yellowstone Will End After Season 5 How to Watch Yellowstone Best Only Murders in the Building Fashion There's No New Episode of Outlander This Week And Just Like That... Season 2 Guide The Summer I Turned Pretty Renewed for Season 3? Is The Afterparty Returning for a Season 3? How to Watch the 2023 Women's World Cup Emma Corrin to Star in New Murder Mystery Show Why Beatrice Borromeo Made The King Who Never Was Would Meghan Markle Return for a Suits Reboot? A Part of Hearst Digital Media We may earn commission from links on this page, but we only recommend products we back. ©2023 Hearst Magazine Media, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Pre-orders for the PS VR2 headset, games, and PS VR2 Sense Controller charging station are underway starting today. 									 Update: Pre-order directly from PlayStation’s online store at direct.playstation.com before PlayStation VR2 launches on February 22. Over the past several months, we’ve introduced PlayStation VR2 and provided glimpses into the next generation of virtual reality gaming, which will allow you to escape into new worlds  while feeling a groundbreaking sense of immersion. Today, I’m very pleased to announce that PlayStation VR2 is officially launching on February 22, 2023. PlayStation VR2 Sense controller charging station, designed specifically for the PS VR2 Sense controller, will also launch the same day.  Here is the PS VR2 lineup and recommended retail pricing for each product. Availability in each country is subject to local import regulations.     Standalone software titles, including Horizon Call of the Mountain, will also be available for pre-orders starting this month. More details will be provided at a later date.   During this initial launch phase for our next-gen headset, players in the U.S., U.K., France, Germany, Belgium, Netherlands and Luxembourg will initially be able to pre-order PlayStation VR2 solely through PlayStation’s online store at direct.playstation.com. Pre-orders will begin on November 15, and players may begin to register for pre-orders starting today. Orders from direct.playstation.
Here's all you need to know about the PlayStation VR2 price, release date and features. Sony has revealed its next gen virtual reality system is called the PlayStation VR2 (PSVR2), and its new VR controller has been officially named the PlayStation VR2 Sense controller. On this page, we're bringing you the latest PSVR 2 news updates including the PSVR2 price, release date and pre-order info. It goes without saying, this new VR headset will be in high demand and you'll need to be quick if you want to get one on its launch date. So whether you're planning to upgrade your PSVR headset to this latest model or you're buying a VR headset for the first time, here you'll find all you need to know about the PSVR2 release date, price, games, and where to buy it. We've also detailed the PSVR 2 specifications so you can decide if this will be the virtual reality headset for you. Let's dive in! (Last updated: 2nd November 2022)  The PSVR2 will release on 22nd February 2023, debunking previous speculations that Sony is planning an end of year release. In April 2022, Analyst Ross Young claimed that the PSVR2 would not be entering the wild until 2023. Young wrote on Twitter that VR display shipments were to rise in 2022 despite delays to 2023 at Sony.
52  Tiger Woods and Rory McIlroy have a new business venture together. The two PGA Tour stars, along with founder and CEO Mike McCarley, announced Tuesday the formation of TMRW Sports, a new company “focused on building technology-focused ventures that feature progressive approaches to sports, media and entertainment.” Television executive Dick Ebersol is also an initial investor. TMRW Sports is here! We’re a company founded by @TigerWoods, @McIlroyRory & sports executive Mike McCarley. Our focus is on building pioneering ventures that feature progressive approaches to sports, media & technology. Learn more: https://t.co/ItAbANOWSI #TMRWSports = Tomorrow pic.twitter.com/Z9svD1d6iG — TMRW Sports (@TMRWSports) August 23, 2022  “Both Tiger and Rory’s competitive spirit extends beyond the golf course, and both have proven track records in supporting ventures that are modernizing the way sports are played, enjoyed, and consumed,” McCarley, who previously served as Golf Channel’s president, said in a release. Advertisement According to a Golfweek report, the group is behind a new technology-driven competition series for top stars on the PGA Tour. The new venture will reportedly feature a series of one-day events held in a non-green grass, stadium environment. They are expected to be held in partnership with the PGA Tour and launch in 2024.
Tiger Woods and Rory McIlroy are spearheading a new venture that will have the world’s top golfers competing against each other in a non-green grass, stadium environment, Golfweek has learned. Multiple sources say a series of events will be held in partnership with the PGA Tour and that more specifics could be announced by Commissioner Jay Monahan this week at the Tour Championship. The one-day events are designed to complement the PGA Tour schedule and will launch in 2024, according to multiple sources familiar with the concept. Early thinking suggests the showdowns — which will be technology-forward and staged with a live audience — could run January through March, with a finale held later. Discussions about broadcast and gaming partners are underway. A source at NBC Sports says the network has an option to be the media partner in the venture. Details about the plan were shared with Tour members who attended the players-only meeting held on August 16 during the BMW Championship, for which Woods made a special trip from his home in Florida. It was presented as a long-term opportunity for players to build equity in the enterprise, which will have private funding in addition to corporate partnerships and sponsors. The proposal was received positively among players in the room, according to a source familiar with the conversation. Woods and McIlroy began working on the project more than two years ago, a collaboration that friends say has brought them closer.
Super.tech was founded in 2020 based on pioneering quantum computing research from EPiQC, an NSF Expedition in Computing at the University of Chicago. (Image: iStock.com/AndreyPopov) A University of Chicago quantum software spinout and Duality Cohort 1 participant, Super.tech has been acquired by a global quantum ecosystem leader, ColdQuanta. Super.tech is embedded in Argonne National Laboratory’s Chain Reaction Innovations program and is also incubated by Duality, the first accelerator dedicated exclusively to supporting quantum startups, operated by the Chicago Quantum Exchange and UChicago’s Polsky Center. Following the acquisition, ColdQuanta is establishing a Chicago-based office that will draw on the talent and innovation from the University and the city’s robust startup ecosystem. Super.tech’s full team will remain on board, including CEO Pranav Gokhale, PhD ’20, and Chief Scientist Fred Chong who will lead the new office as vice president of quantum software and chief scientist of quantum software, respectively. “Becoming part of ColdQuanta is incredibly exciting because Super.tech’s strength is building software that is tailored to the physics of quantum technologies, and ColdQuanta gives us intimate access to a range of computing, sensing, and communication technologies,” said Chong, Seymour Goodman Professor in the University’s department of computer science. “Together, we will create the most effective quantum systems across a range of applications in the quantum industry.
G&W is pleased to announce the recent acquisition of SuperTech, Inc. in Fayetteville, GA.  SuperTech, founded by Robert and Alicia Nyborg over 20 years ago has built a solid reputation in the Atlanta market by providing quality equipment and exceptional service. The Nyborg family will continue to run the daily operation and all of the employees will stay in their same capacity so we can continue to support our customers.  With our combined efforts, G&W now has over 35 employees  to support the Atlanta market. We are excited about this partnership and look forward to our continued growth in the state of Georgia.   Welcome Super Tech!
USC Trojans quarterback Caleb Williams is the reigning Heisman Trophy winner after a breakout season in 2022. Now, we can look ahead to the candidates who will join the growing list of Heisman winners. Stay tuned for the upcoming year as we evaluate the leading Heisman candidates, track performances and so much more. Once the college football season begins, we’ll provide weekly updates on the 2023 Heisman Trophy race. Related: Most Heisman Trophy winners by school Before diving into our favorite Heisman Trophy candidates in 2023, with full breakdowns for our top picks, here’s a rundown of the latest Heisman odds and Sportsnaut’s Heisman watch list. Here are the latest Heisman odds, via FanDuel. Here is our early list of the favorites to win the Heisman Trophy 2023. We’ll provide individual breakdowns for each of the players this off-season. Caleb Williams is the favorite to win the 2023 Heisman Trophy, to the surprise of no one. While history suggests it will be another player hosting the coveted trophy at the Heisman ceremony next December, Williams is in a great position to repeat. While USC loses Jordan Addison, it welcomes new offensive weapons that can thrive in this system. More importantly, Williams will be in his third season with Lincoln Riley. Plus, USC’s defense is going to require a lot of shootouts in 2023.
Further below, you can find an early look at our 2023 Heisman candidates.  Here are the 2021 Heisman voting results. With 83% of the total possible points, Bryce Young finished with the seventh-highest total in Heisman Trophy voting history.
GoldDerby We waited more than a year for “The Amazing Race 33” after COVID-19 suspended production in 2020, but the wait for Season 34 was not as long. Here’s what you need to know about the current season of “The Amazing Race.” When will Season 34 premiere? It already did. Season 34 premiered Wednesday, Sept. 21 at 10/9c on CBS. On Wednesday, Nov. 2, it moved up an hour to 9/8c, where it will air for the remainder of the season. When will Season 34 end? Season 34 will air its finale on Wednesday, Dec. 7 at 9/8c on CBS. The final three teams are “Big Brother 23” couple Derek Xiao and Claire Rehfuss, married couple Luis Colon and Michelle Burgos, and long-lost twins Emily Bushnell and Molly Sinert.            Who is in the Season 34 cast? Click here to meet the 12 teams. Where will Season 34 visit? Season 34’s stops included Austria, Italy, France, Spain, Iceland and Jordan, and CBS has revealed all the Pit Stop locations in those countries. The starting line was in Munich, the first time the start is outside of the United States. The finish line will be in Nashville, where tasks include delivering guitars, playing on a giant floor piano and packaging whiskey bottles.
5 and 12 with an elimination in the latter hour. The second Mega Leg aired on Nov. 16 and 23. In total, there will be 10 legs airing over 12 episodes. SEE ‘The Amazing Race 34’ cast: Here are the 12 new teams            When did Season 34 film? Filming commenced on May 22 and wrapped mid-June. Keoghan filmed both “The Amazing Race” and his other CBS series “Tough as Nails” this summer. Production started two months after CBS renewed “The Amazing Race” for a 34th season in March, a week after the Season 33 finale aired. Despite the difficulties with the pandemic, which halted production on Season 33 from February 2020 until September 2021, a renewal was always in the offing. Keoghan told Gold Derby in June 2021 that “the expectation from the network is that we get Season 33 finished and then we roll into more seasons again.” In December, while Omicron was surging, co-creator and executive producer Bertram van Munster said it was a “waiting game right now” in regards to future seasons. “We’re being very, very careful.” What will Season 34 look like?
Toulouse Football Club is a French professional football club based in Toulouse. The club was founded in 1970 and currently plays in Ligue 1, the first division of French football. Toulouse plays its home matches at the Stadium de Toulouse located within the city.  Les Pitchouns are the current holders of the Coupe de France, and have won the second tier Ligue 2 on three occasions.[2] Toulouse have participated in European competition five times, including in 2007 when they qualified for the UEFA Champions League for the first time.[3] They are set to participate in the 2023–24 UEFA Europa League, following their victory in the preceding year's Coupe de France.   The president of Toulouse FC is Damien Comolli, who succeeded the French businessman Olivier Sadran who took over the club following its bankruptcy in 2001 which resulted in it being relegated to the Championnat National. The club has served as a springboard for several players, most notably the World Cup-winning goalkeeper Fabien Barthez, international strikers André-Pierre Gignac[4] and Martin Braithwaite.  The city was left without a big side in 1967 when Toulouse FC sold its players and place in the French top flight to Paris outfit Red Star, but three years later a new club, Union Sportive Toulouse, rose from the ashes.
Olivier Jaubert, formerly with Nike and the FFF, runs the commercial and business side of the club, with Comolli overseeing the football operation. There is regular dialogue, too, with the owners in the United States. Advertisement Toulouse now comes under the umbrella of RedBird FC, a separate entity to RedBird Capital Partners whose portfolio grows ever more impressive. The fund will add AC Milan to its roster early next month, has also taken a stake in the Indian Premier League cricket team Rajasthan Royals and owns 50 per cent of Zelus Analytics, a sports data business whose input shapes Toulouse’s transfer policy. The club have gladly tapped into their owners’ expertise in the fields of merchandise, media and sport, with the chain of decision-making slick and efficient. RedBird representatives, initially frustrated by COVID-19 restrictions, have visited Toulouse two or three times since their purchase but there is a company business call once a fortnight, and a weekly football club call. “The operation needs to be self-sustainable, and we are,” adds the club president. “We were even in Ligue 2. We are making money. The owners couldn’t believe that, but last year we made money — a significant profit. “Now the ambition is to improve the facilities. We are investing money into a new training ground and €1million to refurbish the academy. We want to invest in the stadium, and the municipality are very open to that.
TGL is a planned golf league created by TMRW Sports, a venture formed by sports executive Mike McCarley and professional golfers Tiger Woods and Rory McIlroy, in partnership with the PGA Tour. It will launch in January 2024, with events held on Monday nights in conjunction with the PGA Tour schedule.[1]  On August 24, 2022, the PGA Tour, along with Tiger Woods, Rory McIlroy and Mike McCarley, announced the formation of TGL.[2]  It will initially feature six teams of three PGA Tour players, competing head-to-head in 18-hole match play on a virtual course with a special short game area. Fifteen matches, each lasting two hours and played in primetime on Monday nights, will make up the regular season. The semi-finals and a final match will be held at the end of the season.[3]  TMRW Sports is building the first TGL venue in Palm Beach, Florida, through a partnership with Palm Beach State College. The group broke ground at the venue on February 20, 2023.[4][5] The venue will include educational and recreational facilities.[6] Construction is being overseen by CAA Icon.[7]
According to ESPN, the TGL has begun started creating an arena on the campus of Palm Beach State College in Palm Beach Gardens, Florida. The TGL is expected to be broadcasted Monday nights in prime time. Fans will be able to watch all the action as the league begins its inaugural season. "As soon as I learned about TGL, I jumped at the opportunity to be a part of it,” Rahm said. "As an avid user of the latest tech in golf with launch monitors, simulators and virtual greens and my personal passion for gaming, I immediately recognized the potential for TGL to introduce golf to a broader global audience — especially younger fans. I’m proud to announce my commitment to compete and help shape the future of golf for the next generation.
After revealing earlier this year that it was making a BioShock movie, Netflix has announced who will be directing it and who's writing the script. And you might recognize them, and if not, you'll almost certainly recognize the movies they've worked on.  Netflix revealed in a tweet made today that Francis Lawrence (I Am Legend, The Hunger Games: Catching Fire, Slumberland) will direct this BioShock film adaptation and Michael Green (Loga, Blade Runner 2049, American Gods) will write the script.  BioShock — our live-action feature film adaptation of the renowned video game franchise — will be directed by Francis Lawrence (I Am Legend, The Hunger Games: Catching Fire, Slumberland) from a script written by Michael Green (Logan, Blade Runner 2049, American Gods). pic.twitter.com/mDh4ut6ayJ And that's all Netflix had to reveal about the movie today. Perhaps we'll learn of casting soon. In the meantime, read about the original announcement.  Does this director and writer announcement excite you? Let us know in the comments below!  View the discussion thread.  © 1991 to  Game Informer. All Rights Reserved.
Privacy Policy enter Now Playing: Everything We Want in a Bioshock Movie The director went on to say that BioShock has a "strange mash-up of genre," touching upon things like horror and sci-fi, as well as how it's a period piece. "I think it can be really unique and really beautiful and really entertaining" as a film, Lawrence said. A BioShock movie was planned many years ago from Pirates of the Caribbean director Gore Verbinski, but its R rating proved to be an issue. Now that it's being made for Netflix, Lawrence said there are "always discussions about rating and tone," but he is feeling free to execute on his own vision. "I certainly have not felt stifled in any way, or sent in any directions with Netflix," he said, adding that the key creative team can basically do "what we want to do" with the movie. Additionally, Lawrence said he has been in contact with BioShock rights owner Take-Two and original writer-director Ken Levine. As for a status update on how the BioShock movie is progressing through development, Lawrence said Green is in the middle of writing the movie. As such, there is a "real possibility" that Lawrence will make it next, but nothing is certain yet.
We cheered Max’s disruption of the status quo and applauded when he asked his patients the simple yet profound question, ‘How can I help?’ Over the last four seasons, David, Peter, and our incredible cast have tackled important and thought-provoking stories that have touched on the human condition, but also made us laugh and imbued hope. We’re so proud of this series and are indebted to everyone involved in bringing New Amsterdam to life. Bravo!” More details are here regarding what fans can expect from New Amsterdam Season 5, specifically around some key characters. Plus, the latest key art for the season has been revealed.  New Amsterdam Season 5 premieres Tuesday, September 20 at 10/9c on NBC and next day on Peacock. While we don't yet have an official trailer, NBC did release a First Look that sees Eggold getting emotional as he reflects on the final season of New Amsterdam.  A post shared by New Amsterdam (@nbcnewamsterdam) "I can't believe we're here five seasons in and it's already our fifth and final season," he said, "and just an excitement to bring the show to a close and to sort of put a period at the end of that sentence. You don't always get the opportunity to end the story so it's going to be an exciting last chapter." We don't have any photos from the episodes, yet.
Create a free profile to get unlimited access to exclusive show news, updates, and more! The Dam Fam will have to wait a few weeks before the final season wraps in 2023. For the next few weeks, Dam Fam members may get settled in on their Tuesday nights, ready to watch a new episode of New Amsterdam. However, they'll soon discover that—unfortunately—there are no new episodes to watch. That's because Season 5 of the medical drama is currently on a hiatus until 2023. Below, read everything you need to know about the show's break and when it comes back. Watch every episode of New Amsterdam on Peacock.   Following its two-hour midseason finale on November 22, Season 5 of New Amsterdam is on a holiday hiatus and will not air any more new episodes in 2022. The fifth season will return with Episode 11 on Tuesday, January 3, 2023 at 10/9c on NBC. There will then be another quick break on Tuesday, January 10 because of the Golden Globes. However, the next week (January 17) marks the two-episode series finale, in which New Amsterdam will come to an end.
The 2022 FIFA World Cup final was the final match of the 2022 FIFA World Cup, the 22nd edition of FIFA's competition for men's national football teams. The match was played at Lusail Stadium in Lusail, Qatar, on 18 December 2022, the Qatari National Day, and was contested by Argentina and defending champions France. The final took place in front of 88,966 supporters, with a record crowd of 1.5 billion people watching on television, becoming one of the most widely-watched televised sporting events in history.[3]  The tournament comprised hosts Qatar and 31 other teams who emerged victorious from the qualification phase, organised by the six FIFA confederations. The 32 teams competed in a group stage, from which 16 teams qualified for the knockout stage. En route to the final, Argentina finished first in Group C, first losing to Saudi Arabia 2–1, then defeating both Mexico and Poland 2–0. They then won against Australia in the round of 16, the Netherlands in the quarter-final through a penalty shoot-out, and Croatia in the semi-final. France finished top of Group D with two wins and one loss (4–1 win over Australia, 2–1 win over Denmark, and a 1–0 loss to Tunisia), defeating Poland in the round of 16, England in the quarter-final and Morocco in the semi-final.
It did, according to the game’s officials and England won 4-2.           The 1970 final marked Pelé’s last World Cup appearance as he secured his third title in Brazil’s swashbuckling victory over Italy.           Four years later in Munich, host West Germany came from behind to win 2-1 against a star-studded Netherlands team – made up of Johan Cruyff and Johan Neeskens – to win its second World Cup.           Much like Messi at Qatar 2022, Diego Maradona almost single-handedly drove his team to its second title in eight years, beating West Germany 3-2 in the final.           In 1998, France hosted and won its first World Cup, mainly down to the genius of Zinedine Zidane, who scored twice in the final, to beat a formidable Brazil side, composed of Ronaldo, Rivaldo, Cafu, Bebeto and Roberto Carlos.            However, with its multiples story lines and the drama and artistry on display, surely the 2022 showpiece now owns the title of ‘greatest World Cup final.’    © 2023 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.  CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.
FOX 2 Please enter a search term. Please enter a search term. FOX 2 Chief Meteorologist Glenn Zimmerman is joined by Chris Higgins, Angela Hutti, Jaime Travers, and Linh Truong. John Fuller is the chief meteorologist for KPLR-TV. They bring a wealth of experience when covering the weather in St. Louis and the surrounding areas. Glenn Zimmerman is the Chief Meteorologist for FOX 2 News. He has been forecasting weather in St. Louis for over 30 years. When he doesn’t have his head in the clouds, he is into photography, music, and has competed in several triathlons. Wake up with Linh Truong’s forecasts Monday-Friday on Fox 2 News in the Morning. She has years of experience forecasting in different parts of the country.  John Fuller came to St. Louis in June of 1983, recently celebrating 30 years of weather coverage in St. Louis. Despite his longevity, John Says, “just when I think I have St. Louis area weather figured out, a new wrinkle develops, like the 2012 drought or Spring 2013 tornadoes. With the weather constantly changing, we must adapt and adjust as meteorologists.” Chris Higgins was born and raised here in the St. Louis area.
Maggie Rotermund    			Senior Media Relations Specialistmaggie.rotermund@slu.edu314-977-8018 Reserved for members of the media. ST. LOUIS - The students in Chris Higgins’ principles of broadcast meteorology class                got a taste of life in television journalism Wednesday when the KTVI/KPLR meteorologist                did a live newscast during their class at Saint Louis University.  KTVI meteorologist Chris Higgins does a live broadcast on KPLR-TV Ch. 11 during his                      broadcast meteorology class at SLU on April 12. Photo by Maggie Rotermund. Higgins did the weather reports for the 7 p.m. newscast on KPLR-TV Ch. 11 from a spot                near the Joseph G. Lipic Clock Tower on West Pine Mall. Higgins had three live segments                during the hour-long broadcast, plus a quick intro at the beginning of the show. During                the breaks, he and his camera person offered tips and tricks of the trade on live                broadcasting.  “It was amazing to see how Chris and Lou were able to work together when an obstacle                popped up,” said freshman Evelyn Maruszak.  Maruszak’s goal is a career in broadcast meteorology. “This broadcast course has been such a wonderful opportunity, and it is so special
Sinclair marks the second significant hire at Riff Raff, which recently brought on seasoned Stephen Fuss, a media veteran with top stints at Stargrove Pictures and Ingenious Media, as CEO to support the growth of the television and film production company.    	It also comes after Riff Raff received a multi-million dollar capital injection from Calculus Capital, including the Calculus Creative Content EIS Fund, which will provide overhead for key new hires and enable the company to acquire and develop more projects. The company says that funding, along with a first-look deal with New Republic Pictures inked in 2021, will help Riff Raff acquire highly sought-after material and attach premium writers across both sides of the Atlantic.  	“I’m really excited to be joining Riff Raff at such a pivotal time, as the company develops and grows its already very exciting slate of film and TV projects,” said Sinclair. “I can’t wait to start working with Jude, Ben and Stephen, helping make Riff Raff a home for exciting writers, directors and IP.”   	“We are absolutely thrilled to have Katie Sinclair join our team as head of development.
As we grow and continue to develop and produce new and exciting projects across film and television, her great knowledge, experience and taste is a perfect match and sure to be of huge benefit to us,” added Law, Riff Raff co-founder and creative founder Ben Jackson, and Fuss. Riff Raff received secured a multi-million dollar capital injection from Calculus Capital, including the Calculus Creative Content EIS Fund, providing overhead funding for key new hires and a focus to acquire and develop premium IP. A first look deal with New Republic Pictures was signed in 2021.  2023-08-08T08:42:00Z  ‘You Were Never Really Here’ to screen at the festival.  2023-08-08T08:09:00Z  Bookmark this page for the latest updates in the territory.  2023-08-07T13:16:00Z  ‘Barbie’ enters all-time top 20; ‘Oppenheimer’ in top 100, passes ‘Inception’.  2023-08-08T08:08:00Z  Bookmark this page to keep track of all the latest festival dates.  2023-08-07T23:41:00Z  The studio is assessing ”marketing challenges” for its theatrical slate.   2023-08-07T21:40:00Z  The director’s latest film is set to premiere at Venice Film Festival.
Texas Tech agreed to pay former women's basketball coach Marlene Stollings a little more than $740,000 as part of a settlement of a lawsuit in which she accused the school and its athletics director, Kirby Hocutt, of discrimination and retaliation, according to a copy of the settlement agreement USA TODAY Sports obtained from the university through a public records request. The school fired Stollings for cause in August 2020, the day after the publication of an investigation by USA TODAY Sports and The Intercollegiate, a college sports investigative media outlet. Players alleged there was a culture of abuse under Stollings and described a toxic culture that generated "fear, anxiety and depression." In her lawsuit, Stollings argued that two internal reviews conducted by the school before the investigation was published cleared her of the allegations. STAY UP TO DATE:Subscribe to our Sports newsletter now! The lawsuit, filed in October 2020, was settled on Aug. 10. The settlement shows Stollings received $300,000 for alleged compensatory damages, including emotional pain, suffering, inconvenience, mental anguish and loss of enjoyment of life. She received $300,000 for attorneys' fees and expenses incurred by Stollings, plus an additional $140,666.00 for back wages, according to the agreement.
Texas Tech and Marlene Stollings, fired as the head women’s basketball coach in August 2020 after a USA TODAY Sports investigation into the program, have settled a lawsuit in which Stollings accused the school and athletics director Kirby Hocutt of discrimination and retaliation.  Texas Tech fired Stollings the day after an investigation by USA TODAY Sports and The Intercollegiate, a college sports investigative media outlet, was published. Players alleged there was a culture of abuse under Stollings and described a toxic culture that generated "fear, anxiety and depression." Stollings argued in her lawsuit that two internal reviews conducted by the school before the investigation was published cleared her of the allegations. Stollings sued Texas Tech in October 2020 and the case was scheduled to go to trial in February 2023. The two sides on Wednesday filed a joint motion to settle, and a judge on Thursday dismissed the case. Terms of the settlement were not immediately available. The school cannot comment on the settlement, according to Robert Giovannetti, Texas Tech’s Senior Associate Athletics Director of External Operations & Strategic Communications. Stollings was under contract through March 2024 at the time of her dismissal.
Sony and Tencent acquired a 30 percent stake of FromSoftware, the esteemed Japanese video game studio behind “Elden Ring” and the Dark Souls series, Wednesday. Kadokawa Corporation, the Tokyo-based media corporation that owns FromSoftware, announced in a news release that Sony and Tencent had both purchased significant shares in FromSoftware. Sony Interactive Entertainment (a subsidiary of Sony behind the PlayStation brand) holds 14.09 percent of FromSoftware’s shares; Sixjoy Hong Kong Limited (a subsidiary of Tencent) owns 16.25 percent, bringing the collective stake to 30.34 percent. Kadokawa still maintains majority ownership at 69.66 percent. In the announcement, Kadokawa explained that the three companies had operated a “strategic alliance in the anime and game fields” since October 2021. Kadokawa said these recent investments would be used to further expand FromSoftware’s expansion into the global market and strengthen the triumvirate formed with Tencent and Sony. “Through the implementation of the fund procurement,” Kadokawa wrote in its press release, “FromSoftware will aim to proactively invest in development of more powerful game IP for itself to strengthen FromSoftware’s development capabilities and will seek to establish a framework that allows the expansion of the scope of its own publishing in the significantly growing global market.
Wouldn't mind a Bloodborne 2  @Omnistalgic Help From? They are helping themselves by raking in the $$$ from FromSoftware's success  Meanwhile fans are still waiting for Bloodborne Remastered on PS5 & PC...give them a bone please.  @Art_Vandelay that’s facts. However, people can still voice their opinion on the subject. You don’t have to stay silent when you don’t agree with something  From my POV, this is a waste of time for me because FromSoftware haven't made a good game since Tenchu.  @NeThZOR They could have likely had the studio be a part of WWS if they pursued them further after Demon's souls. Big difference.  @theMEGAniggle That is definitely why we're here. But what almost always happens is that people love to whine and pretend to hate the evil greedy corporation but when push comes to shove, they don't put their money where their mouth is. And hence that negativity for negativity's sake unnecessarily gets in the way of our enjoyment of this great form of entertainment.  @Art_Vandelay real talk  Tap here to load 59 comments Leave A Comment Hold on there, you need to login to post a comment...
The Voice season 22 coaches are Blake Shelton, John Legend, Gwen Stefani and newcomer Camila Cabello. Camila is replacing Kelly Clarkson, who joined The Voice in February 2018. She appeared on the series for eight seasons. When Blake revealed that The Voice would be premiering in the fall, he also encouraged others to duet his TikTok set to MIKA's single "Grace Kelly." Shortly after, John posted a clip of himself singing alongside the "Comeback as a Country Boy" artist. Then, Blake's wife and No Doubt leading lady, Gwen, shared that she was also returning to The Voice with her own singing snippet. The GXVE beauty entrepreneur was previously a coach on the NBC series for five other seasons, including 7, 9, 12, 17 and 19. Last but not least, Camila confirmed her attendance with a brief but telling cameo in a TikTok duet. With that, it was official that The Kelly Clarkson Show host and season 21 coach Ariana Grande would be departing from The Voice.  Kelly hasn't addressed leaving the show, but her departure isn't completely out of the blue. The American Song Contest co-host previously shared that she wanted to spend more time with her kids (8-year-old daughter River and 6-year-old son Remington) — even if it meant switching up her schedule to do so.
The other three coaches were also confirmed to be Blake Shelton (his 22nd cycle), John Legend (his seventh season) and Gwen Stefani (her sixth installment). Watch a video trailer above to see Camila making her grand debut. “The Voice” premiere date Season 22 will premiere Monday, September 19 at 8 p.m. PT/ET on NBC. It will air Mondays and Tuesdays throughout the Fall season.            Season 22 battle advisors On August 17, 2022, NBC unveiled the list of “The Voice” mentors for the upcoming battle rounds. The battle advisors for this season are Jazmine Sullivan for Team Legend, Sean Paul for Team Gwen, Charlie Puth for Team Camila, and Jimmie Allen for Team Blake. “The Voice” format “The Voice” always begins with the blind auditions, in which aspiring artists sing to the backs of the coaching panel. If a judge likes what they hear, they push their “I Want You” button, which turns their chair around. If more than one coach pushes their button, then the artist gets to choose which team they want to join. Following that initial round, the show pivots to the battles and knockouts, which is when each of the coaches pare down their teams, and finally to the live playoffs, which is when America gets to vote for their favorite performers.
7%) in May 2020 and July 2020.  Unemployment in the transportation sector was above overall unemployment. BLS reports that the U.S. unemployment rate, not seasonally adjusted, in August 2022 was 3.8% or 0.8 percentage points below the transportation sector rate. Seasonally adjusted, the U.S. unemployment rate in August 2022 was 3.7%.      In addition to the update of the Unemployment in Transportation dashboard, BTS also released its monthly update to its Employment in Transportation: Total, by Mode, and Women, and Race and Hispanic or Latino Ethnicity of Transportation Workers dashboards.  Charts Updated this Month by Section include: Unemployment in the Transportation and Warehousing Sector and in Transportation and Material Moving Occupations Monthly Employment in the Transportation and Warehousing Sector, Establishment Data Monthly Employment in the Transportation and Warehousing Sector by Race and Hispanic or Latino Ethnicity, Household Data  Visit Transportation Economic Trends for more topics.  Media contact: BTSNews@dot.gov or 1-800-853-1351. U.S.
Aug 2019 Sep 2019 Oct 2019 Nov 2019 Dec 2019 Jan 2020 Feb 2020 Mar 2020 Apr 2020 May 2020 Jun 2020 Jul 2020 Aug 2020 Sep 2020 Oct 2020 Nov 2020 Dec 2020 Jan 2021 Feb 2021 Mar 2021 Apr 2021 May 2021 Jun 2021 Jul 2021 Aug 2021 Sep 2021 Oct 2021 Nov 2021 Dec 2021 Jan 2022 Feb 2022 Mar 2022 Apr 2022 May 2022 Jun 2022 Jul 2022 Aug 2022 The ratio of unemployed people per job opening has been below 1.0 since July 2021. The August 2022 figure marks the first increase in the ratio since April 2020, when it reached 4.9.  The number of unemployed people per job opening reached its highest level of 6.4 in October of 2009, at the height of the Great Recession.  These data are from the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey and are seasonally adjusted. Job openings data for the most recent month are preliminary. To learn more, see "Job Openings and Labor Turnover — August 2022." We also have more charts showing job openings, hires, and separations data.
By         The Associated Press                          Serena Williams motions a heart to fans after losing to Australia's Ajla Tomljanovic during the third round of the U.S. Open tennis championships on Friday in New York.                                                           Frank Franklin II/AP                                       hide caption  Serena Williams motions a heart to fans after losing to Australia's Ajla Tomljanovic during the third round of the U.S. Open tennis championships on Friday in New York. NEW YORK — Leave it to Serena Williams to not want to go quietly, to not want this match, this trip to the U.S. Open, this transcendent career of hers, to really, truly end. Right down to what were, barring a change of heart, the final minutes of her quarter-century of excellence on the tennis court, and an unbending unwillingness to be told what wasn't possible, Williams tried to mount one last classic comeback, earn one last vintage victory, with fans on their feet in a full Arthur Ashe Stadium, cellphone cameras at the ready. The 23-time Grand Slam champion staved off five match points to prolong the three-hours-plus proceedings, but could not do more, and was eliminated from the U.S. Open in the third round by Ajla Tomljanovic 7-5, 6-7 (4), 6-1 on Friday night in what is expected to be her final contest. "I've been down before. ...
"I think we all need to just honor Serena and her amazing career," Emma Raducanu, 19, said after the match Jason Hahn is a former Human Interest and Sports Reporter for PEOPLE. He started at PEOPLE's Los Angeles Bureau as a writer and reporter in 2017 and interviewed the likes of Kobe Bryant, Arnold Schwarzenegger and Tom Brady. He has a B.A. in English from the University of California, Berkeley, and a Master's degree in Journalism from Columbia University. He previously worked for Complex Magazine in New York City.  In her second match since announcing she would retire from professional tennis, Serena Williams lost to Emma Raducanu at the Western & Southern Open in Ohio on Tuesday.   Williams lost in straight sets to the British tennis player during the 65-minute match, according to the Washington Post. Raducanu, 19, won the match 6-4, 6-0.   It's widely expected that Williams' next tournament, the U.S. Open later this month, will be the final one of her storied career. The 23-time Grand Slam champion said she planned to "evolve away from tennis" after the New York City tournament in an essay for Vogue on August 9.   After the match, Raducanu paid tribute to Williams and all she has accomplished.   "I think we all need to just honor Serena and her amazing career," she said, per CNN.
Four people were killed and eight injured after a shuttle van crashed Friday morning on New Jersey’s Palisades Interstate Parkway, officials said. At about 1:30 a.m., police received reports of a crash in the center median of the parkway's southbound lanes in Englewood Cliffs, a borough in Bergen County, New Jersey, the Palisades Interstate Parkway Police said in a statement. When officers arrived at the scene, they found "a single vehicle accident rollover" and several passengers trapped in the vehicle. Four of the passengers suffered "severe trauma" and were pronounced dead at the scene while eight others were hospitalized with injuries ranging from severe head trauma to minor physical complaints, police said. Police did not immediately identify the victims. The shuttle van, listed as a Ford Econoline E350 passenger cargo van with New York registration, takes people to and from factories in upstate New York, police said. The van was carrying 12 passengers at the time of the crash. The crash also snarled traffic as the southbound lanes of the parkway remained closed Friday morning. The cause of the crash is under investigation by parkway police, the Bergen County Sheriff's Office and other agencies.
The van served as a shuttle "for workers in factories in upstate New York," police said in Friday's release.   Family members of two female victims told NBC New York that the shuttle was bringing workers back to New York City from Chester. Family members told the outlet the factory was for "a major global designer and manufacturer of party goods."   Police also said the passengers were returning home from work and would be dropped off in the Tri-State area, according to WPIX.   It is unclear what caused the crash, police said in Friday's release. An investigation into the incident is underway.   The southbound lanes of the highway were briefly closed for motorists, beginning at Exit 2, as officials investigated the crash early Friday morning, according to WPIX.   Police said the lanes have since reopened.
Virginia QB Brennan Armstrong is hit and loses the ball, but teammate Bobby Haskins is able to dive on it in the end zone for a safety. (1:10) Penn State defensive coordinator Brent Pry has been named the new head football coach at Virginia Tech, the Hokies announced Tuesday. Pry, 51, replaces former Hokies coach Justin Fuente, who was out as Hokies coach as of Nov. 16 after his teams went 43-31 in six seasons. Pry returns to Blacksburg, where he served as a defensive graduate assistant for the Hokies from 1995 to 1997 under head coach Frank Beamer and defensive coordinator Bud Foster. "On behalf of Amy and our family, we are extremely grateful to President [Timothy] Sands and [athletic director] Whit [Babcock] for extending us this opportunity at Virginia Tech," Pry said in a statement released by the school. "Working for Coach Beamer and Coach Foster as a graduate assistant in the 1990s, I was privileged to have been a part of this program as the Hokies established themselves as a national power, consistently proving they could beat anyone in the nation. "Even after I departed Blacksburg, I always continued to appreciate Virginia Tech, its great players, its championship teams, and its wonderful traditions from afar. The resources, facilities, university backing of Athletics, and phenomenal fan support that Virginia Tech enjoys made this a very desirable situation.
The Virginia Tech Hokies college football team represents Virginia Tech in the Football Bowl Subdivision (FBS) of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) and the Coastal Division of the Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC).  The program has had 33 head coaches, and 1 interim head coach, since it began play during the 1892 season.[1]    Joseph V. Paterno Award (2010)Big East Coach of the Year (1995, 1996, 1999)ACC Coach of the Year (2004, 2005)[A 12]  Neyland Trophy (2017)[6]
Please refresh the page or navigate to another page on the site to be automatically logged inPlease refresh your browser to be logged in Tragic accident occurred during her first solo jump Find your bookmarks in your Independent Premium section, under my profile TikTok influencer Tanya Pardazi has died in a tragic skydiving accident, aged 21. According to the former Miss Canada semi-finalist’s friends, Pardazi died while performing the activity in Ontario, Canada on 27 August. According to a statament by the skydiving company, Pardazi opened her parachute too late while in the air during her first solo course. The aspiring beauty queen was rushed to hospital, where she was pronounced dead. Skydive Toronto said in a statement: “A skydiving student aged 21 succumbed to fatal injuries obtained by an emergency situation. “The skydiver released a quickly rotating main parachute at a low altitude without the time / altitude required for the reserve parachute to inflate.” It added: “The team at Skydive Toronto is currently working with the South Simcoe Police on their investigation. “The jumper was a welcomed recent addition to the skydiving community and will be missed among the student’s new friends and fellow jumpers of Skydive Toronto Inc.” Skydive Toronto stated it “has been profoundly affected by this accident as they have refined their student training program for over 50 years”.
Ozgoli described her as outgoing, adventurous, open-minded, always there for others, and intelligent.           “She was definitely known for how beautiful she was, but what she was known mostly for was her incredible mind. That is the one thing that every single person that I talked to mentioned, just how bright she was, how smart she was, how much she knew,” Ozgoli, 20, said.           Pardazi was known for “picking up new hobbies,” according to Ozgoli, who called her friend a “gift to the world.”           Ozgoli said a funeral for Pardazi, held Friday, was well-attended.           “At the ceremony, we all wore white because she was an angel,” Ozgoli said. “I think it was a unique thing to do, and that’s what Tanya was, she was unique, she was different. She was one of a kind, truly.”           The South Simcoe Police Service “are investigating the fatality in conjunction with the Office of the Chief Coroner,” according to a news release from police.  © 2023 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.  CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.
The latest breaking updates, delivered straight to your email inbox. Nebraska is committing to interim head coach Mickey Joseph for the remainder of the 2022 season. Like Scott Frost, who Nebraska fired Sunday, Joseph is a former Husker quarterback. “After the disappointing start to our season, I decided the best path forward for our program was to make a change in our head coaching position,” Nebraska Athletic Director Trev Alberts said in a statement. Joseph, 54, is the first Black head coach at Nebraska in any sport and among four new members of the staff this season. “Trev has made a good choice in asking Associate Coach Mickey Joseph to step in as interim head coach for the rest of the year and we eagerly look forward to his leadership,” said UNL Chancellor Ronnie Green. He joined the program as the passing game coordinator and wide receivers coach this season, after the firings last fall. “Difficult as this decision is, I fully support AD Alberts’ path (forward), & I have complete confidence in Interim Coach Joseph. There’s lots of football left to be played. Now is the time to rally around our players and give them our full support,” said University of Nebraska President Ted Carter. Prior to joining Nebraska, Joseph served as an assistant head coach at LSU. Joseph was on the LSU staff when the school won the national championship in 2019.
Green (@RonnieDGreen) September 11, 2022  (1/3) We’re grateful for everything Scott Frost has done for the University of Nebraska and the Huskers — as a player, coach and leader of our young men. Unfortunately, the results on the field just aren’t there. Nebraskans expect us to compete for championships, as do I. https://t.co/XPjnM5Cbvy — Ted Carter (@UofNE_President) September 11, 2022  Contact/Follow us @CornhuskersWire on Twitter, and like our page on Facebook to follow ongoing coverage of Nebraska news, notes and opinion. Let us know your thoughts, and comment on this story below. Join the conversation today!   Sign up for the Cornhuskers Wire newsletter to get our top stories in your inbox every morning          				© Copyright Cornhuskers Wire 2023      Powered by WordPress.com VIP  			Please enter an email address.		 Thanks for signing up. Please check your email for a confirmation.  			Something went wrong.
219] Evancho performed three further concerts with Michael Feinstein at his eponymous club in New York in August 2019.[220] Evancho stated in 2019 that she was working with vocal coach Joan Lader.[221][222]  In 2020 Evancho began recording an album of covers of Joni Mitchell songs, produced by Fred Mollin,[223] at Sound Stage Studio in Nashville.[224] She released the disc, titled Carousel of Time, on September 9, 2022.[225] Before its release, Evancho introduced four singles from the album: "River" in October 2020,[226][227] "Both Sides Now" in May 2022,[223] "A Case of You" in July 2022,[228] and "Blue" in August 2022,[229] which she performed on Good Day New York in September[230] and WGN-TV in October.[231] Jill O'Rourke, reviewing the album for TalentRecap.com, wrote: "Evancho brings a signature ethereal quality to Mitchell’s music, as well as a clear emotional connection with the lyrics."[232]
SEE ALSO: JACKIE EVANCHO CONTINUES HER COMEBACK WITH ANOTHER JONI MITCHELL COVER Evancho recently chatted with Talent Recap about the new project, saying that Mitchell is an artist she’s “been very inspired by for a very long time.” She added that something she loves about Mitchell is that she’s “so authentic.” “You know, even for the time period, she did not care what anyone said, as long as she was content with the music,” Evancho shared. “So I think it’s appropriate for the point in my life that I’m going through, and I’m excited to see what everyone thinks of it.” Evancho also shared that she’s “been doing a lot of songwriting,” confirming that fans can expect another album of original songs at some point. As she said, “I will not release until all these originals are done and it is nothing but my work.” The music, the style, the genre, and the essence all fit perfectly with Jackie’s incredible, ethereal voice.  Carousel of Time is now and will be remembered as one of her best gifts to the world. Thank you, Jackie. A talent competition where participants possessing some form of talent from the US and abroad, aim to impress the audience and judges, Simon Cowell, Howie Mandel, Heidi Klum, Sofia Vergara. We are using cookies to give you the best experience on our website.
Notably, FAANG is an extension of the FANG group, it includes Apple Inc (NASDAQ: AAPL), the producer of MacBooks and iPhones, as the fifth renowned company. The MAANG group is an extension of FAANG, the term was coined after Facebook was transformed into Meta Platforms. As a result, the “F” letter was replaced with “M”. Further in this guide, we will focus on the MATANA group that is expected to make headlines in the coming years, according to analysts. The MATANA group is composed of six high-level technology companies: Microsoft Corporation (NASDAQ: MSFT), Apple Inc, Tesla Inc (NASDAQ: TSLA), Alphabet Inc (NASDAQ: GOOGL), Nvidia Corp (NASDAQ: NVDA), and Amazon.com Inc. These giants are regarded as a powerful tech group driving many of the biggest innovations in the world. In terms of market dominance, the stocks of the MATANA group make up almost 50% of the Nasdaq 100 Index, which tracks the performance of the 100 largest non-financial companies listed on the Nasdaq Stock Exchange. Therefore, these companies have a significant influence on the tech market’s returns. This has led the MATANA group to replace the FAANG group as a reference in the tech industry. Moreover, each of the companies comprising the MATANA group has successfully dominated its respective sector. Below are some milestones these tech giants achieved in 2023.
58%McCormick & Company Incorporated (NYSE:MKC): -3.80%Church & Dwight Company (NYSE:CHD): -3:11%CF Industries Holdings (NYSE:CF): -2.94%Williams Companies (NYSE:WMB): -2.79% On the NASDAQ Composite Plus Therapeutics (NASDAQ:PSTV): -18.60%Newegg Commerce Inc (NASDAQ:NEGG): -16.78%Burcon NutraScience Corporation (NASDAQ:BRCN): -15.38%Cadiz Inc. (NASDAQ:CDZI): -14.36%Mannatech Incorporated (NASDAQ:MTEX): -14.18% It is summertime and living should be easy. Folks do tend to go away in August as the market tends to chop around on lower volume. This August has proven to be no exception thus...  S&P 500 EPS growth for Q2 2023 is set to come in at -5.2%, the lowest rate in nearly 3 years and the third consecutive quarter of negative earnings growth Potential... Markets around the world took a hit last week, but American shares are still the clear performance leader for the major asset classes year to date, based on a set of ETFs through... Add a Comment We encourage you to use comments to engage with other users, share your perspective and ask questions of authors and each other.
By Peter White  Television Editor Call it third time lucky. Netflix has finally won Best Animated Program at the Emmys with Arcane picking up the award at the Creative Arts ceremony. It marks the first time that a streaming show has picked up the award. It beat Bob’s Burgers, Rick and Morty, The Simpsons and Chadwick Boseman-voiced What If…? in the hotly contested category. Other streaming contenders in the past have included Netflix’s Big Mouth and BoJack Horseman. Arcane co-creator Christian Linke picked up the award. “Thank you this. It’s a big deal for us as we come from video games. It’s been amazing to see the world embrace our characters and our stories so thanks to Netflix who believed in us from the beginning, thanks to Riot Games, who worked on the whole IP… and to all the people that have been with our game and League of Legends for the last 12 years or so who helped make it as big as it is now,” he said.              	 	 		 					Related Stories		 	              	Acquisitions 	    	 		 					Harry And Meghan Buy Film Rights For Bestselling (And Quite Familiar) Romantic Novel		 			                	Breaking News 	    	 		 					'Suits' Breaks Its Own Nielsen Streaming Record; 'The Lincoln Lawyer' Draws Over 1B Minutes Viewed Following Season 2 Debut
The Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program is a Creative Arts Emmy Award which is given annually to an animated series.  In the following list, the first titles listed in gold are the winners; those not in gold are nominees, which are listed in alphabetical order. The years given are those in which the ceremonies took place.  Animated programs have the option to compete in broader program categories such as Outstanding Comedy Series, but cannot also submit for Outstanding Animation Program in the same year.[citation needed] The Simpsons, for instance, unsuccessfully submitted the episodes "A Streetcar Named Marge" and "Mr. Plow" in 1993 and 1994[1] while Family Guy was successfully nominated in 2009.[2] Several animated programs won Outstanding Children's Program prior to 1979 and, in the years since, Rugrats, Winnie the Pooh specials and Star Wars Rebels have been nominated for that award.  Prior to 1989, all of the nominated programs were specials produced outside the confines of a running series. The category was divided into programs "one hour or less" and "more than one hour" from 1989 to 2009, with episodes of running series becoming eligible. Programs that are 15 minutes or less were given their own category, Outstanding Short Form Animated Program, in 2008.[citation needed]
-- Dinich Championship week games and the final playoff rankings for this year are still to come, but based on the current CFP rankings, an expanded playoff would look like this: Seeds with byes 1. Georgia 2. Michigan 3. TCU 4. USC Remaining seeds (conference champs in bold) 5. Ohio State 6. Alabama 7. Tennessee 8. Penn State 9. Clemson 10. Kansas State 11. Utah 12. Tulane First-round games No. 12 Tulane at No. 5 Ohio State No. 11 Utah at No. 6 Alabama No. 10 Kansas State at No. 7 Tennessee No. 9 Clemson at No. 8 Penn State Quarterfinal games No. 9 Clemson-No. 8 Penn State winner vs. No. 1 Georgia No. 10 Kansas State-No. 7 Tennessee winner vs. No. 2 Michigan No. 11 Utah-No. 6 Alabama winner vs. No. 3 TCU No. 12 Tulane-No. 5 Ohio State winner vs. No. 4 USC There has always been strong support at both the presidential and commissioner level for 12 teams, and part of it is because they like the first-round byes for the top four seeds, but also because of the workable logistics in the overall college football calendar.
The expansion was originally going to start in 2026 after the current deal with the College Football Playoff, but with the Rose Bowl's agreement, it can now happen earlier. The College Football Playoff officially confirmed the 2024-25 timeline for the expansion on Thursday. "We're delighted to be moving forward," Bill Hancock, Executive Director of the College Football Playoff, said per the release. "When the board expanded the playoff beginning in 2026 and asked the CFP Management Committee to examine the feasibility of starting the new format earlier, the Management Committee went right to work. "More teams and more access mean more excitement for fans, alumni, students and student-athletes. We appreciate the leaders of the six bowl games and the two future national championship game host cities for their cooperation. Everyone realized that this change is in the best interest of college football and pulled together to make it happen." MORE: College Football Playoff rankings: Six unbeaten teams create four huge debates The College Football Playoff on Tuesday, May 2 released dates for each round of the expanded playoff, starting with the 2024 season. Based off information released, it the Fiesta, Peach, Cotton and Orange bowls will rotate among the quarterfinal and semifinal rounds, respectively. In 2024, the Fiesta and Peach will be played during the quarterfinals, while the Orange and Cotton will be played in the semifinals. In 2025, those games will be reversed.
World Cup 30  Qatar had to wait 4371 days to play their first World Cup match on home soil after being announced as the hosts of the 2022 tournament by FIFA on December 2, 2010. And now the tournament they have waited so long for is over — in a sense — after just nine days. Qatar lost the opening match of the 2022 World Cup when they fell 2-0 to Ecuador. Advertisement That left them requiring a positive result against Senegal, the reigning African champions, in their second match of the tournament. But, despite an improved performance, Qatar were defeated again, losing 3-1, leaving them on the verge of being eliminated from their own tournament at the first hurdle. But are the hosts definitely out? And are they in danger of being the worst host nation in the 92-year history of the tournament? We take a look below. GO DEEPER The Radar - The Athletic's 2022 World Cup scouting guide Yes. Qatar’s second loss leaves them bottom of Group A with zero points. The Netherlands and Ecuador are both on four points, while Senegal are on three. While Qatar could beat The Netherlands in their final game, they will not be able to overtake them. They also cannot overtake Ecuador, and if Senegal beat Ecuador to get second spot, then Qatar will not be able to catch them either. Third place is the best Qatar can hope for now.
16] The defending champions were France, who defeated Croatia 4–2 in the 2018 FIFA World Cup Final.[17][18] The event was scheduled to take place under a reduced length,[19] from 20 November to 18 December in Qatar.[20][21][22] Being held in Qatar, it was the first World Cup tournament to be held in the Arab world.[23] Spectators were not required to follow most COVID-19 pandemic restrictions such as social distancing, wearing masks, and negative tests.[24]  Unlike previous FIFA World Cups, which are typically played in June and July, because of Qatar's intense summer heat and often fairly high humidity,[2][21][25] the 2022 World Cup was played in November and December.[5][26] As a result, the World Cup was unusually staged in the middle of the seasons of many domestic association football leagues, which started in late July or August, including all of the major European leagues, which had been obliged to incorporate extended breaks into their domestic schedules to accommodate the World Cup. Major European competitions had scheduled their respective competitions group matches to be played before the World Cup, to avoid playing group matches the following year.[27]  The match schedule was confirmed by FIFA in July 2020.[28] The group stage was set to begin on 21 November, with four matches every day.
The Malaysian defense contractor who pleaded guilty to bribing Navy officials with sex parties, fancy dinners and alcohol in a massive corruption scandal has escaped just weeks before his sentencing date. Leonard Glenn Francis, also known as “Fat Leonard” for his overshadowing frame, fled Sunday while under house arrest in San Diego, where he was awaiting a Sept. 22 hearing. A multiagency search by the San Diego Regional Fugitive Task Force and Naval Criminal Investigative Service is underway, officials said. “He cut off his GPS monitoring bracelet on Sunday morning,” the U.S. Marshals Service announced late Monday. “Task Force Officers went to his residence and upon arrival noticed the house was now vacant.” The Navy is working with the U.S. Marshals Service and other federal agencies “to locate and apprehend Mr. Francis,” a service spokesperson said in a statement Tuesday. “Out of respect for the investigative process, we cannot comment further at this time,” the spokesperson added.  Days before he vanished, neighbors recalled seeing moving trucks at Francis’s home, Supervisory Deputy Omar Castillo with the U.S. Marshals’ district in Southern California told the San Diego Union-Tribune. “He was planning this out, that’s for sure,” Castillo told the newspaper, which was the first to report Francis’s escape. Castillo did not immediately respond to a request for comment Monday night.
Unknown to federal monitors, Francis had been moving belongings out of the property – he lived there with his mother and children, according to court documents – for several days as neighbors told federal authorities they saw several U-Haul trucks “coming in and out of the residence,” Castillo said. “There was more than one” seen on Friday or Saturday. Undated photo of Leonard Francis “We are following leads that have come into our national number, as well as our website, and we are following some leads that we have established ourselves,” he said. “As of now, we think he’s probably going international. It sounds like he’s been planning this for a while.” Castillo said he didn’t know what security arrangements were in place at Francis’ residence. He understands that Francis had security monitoring him, issued by the court, but paid for by Francis. “I can tell you nobody was there when we showed up,” he said. “Nobody was there.” It’s unclear how much time Francis had spent detained in U.S. physical custody before or after his conviction on a guilty plea. He had been living in home detention for at least four years, according to unsealed court documents. That arrangement, approved by Sammartino with prosecutors’ support, was based on round-the-clock monitoring by a GPS ankle bracelet and a 24-hour-a-day, seven-days-a-week physical guard at Francis’ residence.
The 2022 NFL season was the 103rd season of the National Football League (NFL). The season began on September 8, 2022, with the defending Super Bowl LVI champion Los Angeles Rams falling to Buffalo in the NFL Kickoff Game, and ended on January 8, 2023. The playoffs started on January 14 and concluded with Super Bowl LVII, the league's championship game, at State Farm Stadium in Glendale, Arizona on February 12, with Kansas City defeating Philadelphia.[1]  The former Washington Redskins, after two seasons of using the placeholder name Washington Football Team, were renamed the Washington Commanders prior to the start of the season.[2]  The week 17 game between Buffalo and Cincinnati was canceled after Buffalo safety Damar Hamlin suffered cardiac arrest on the field of play. It was the first regular season game to be canceled and not rescheduled since the 1987 NFLPA players' strike.[3]  The 2022 NFL league year and trading period began on March 16. On March 14, teams were allowed to exercise options for 2022 on players with option clauses in their contracts, submit qualifying offers to their pending restricted free agents, and submit a Minimum Salary Tender to retain exclusive negotiating rights to their players with expiring 2021 contracts and fewer than three accrued seasons of free agent credit.
The 2023-24 NFL season will kick off on Thursday, Sept. 7, when the Kansas City Chiefs host the Detroit Lions at Arrowhead Stadium in the opener.  Sure, we still have to get through the summer. There will be way too much time spent debating on where quarterbacks rank in the NFL over the next few months, as teams go through offseason workouts and training camp to get ready to take the field. The opening game is the curtain raiser of an 18-week, 272-game regular season schedule that culminates with a frantic final day on Sunday, Jan. 7. Following the conclusion of the regular season, the best 14 teams will battle it out for the chance to play in Super Bowl LVIII on Feb. 11 at Allegiant Stadium in Las Vegas, Nevada. Remember to track WynnBET’s latest NFL betting odds as markets for the upcoming football season begin to get released. New to WynnBET? CLICK your state below to claim your new-user bonus:  AZ | CO | IN | LA | MA | MI | NJ | NY | TN | VA | WV In total, there are 32 NFL teams. The teams are evenly split between the American Football Conference and the National Football Conference.
A new site that reads "Welcome to Meta Connect" teases the one-day Meta Connect event with a live countdown to October 11th. This event will focus on the topic of the metaverse and explore the future of augmented and virtual reality.  The Connect event is not a new concept, with the first one dating back to 2014 when Facebook acquired Oculus. The event was originally called Oculus Connect, then rebranded to Facebook Connect, and finally to what we have today – Meta Connect.  As VR enters a critical adoption phase, these headsets offer a fully immersive experience. These events take an in-depth look at the future of AR and VR with insight from industry leaders and discussions. The website currently says more information and speaker details are coming soon. SEE: 2023 will be a pivotal year for VR: Which headset will you buy? The event comes at a perfect time since Meta CEO Mark Zuckerberg announced in August that the Meta VR Project Cambria headset would be dropping in October during his appearance on The Joe Rogan Experience podcast.  Announced in 2021, Project Cambria is Meta's highest-end VR headset. Like its most popular headset, the Meta Quest 2, it will be a stand-alone device. On the podcast, Zuckerberg also revealed that the headset will have an eye-tracking sensor, unique to this headset.
Alongside the official reveal of the Quest 3, Meta has announced when this year's edition of Connect will take place. The event, which focuses on Meta's developments in the augmented and virtual reality spaces, is set for September 27th and 28th, according to its website. Connect is taking place a little earlier than usual this year. The 2022 edition happened in October. More details about Connect 2023 are coming soon, but one thing's for sure: we'll learn much more about the Quest 3 in late September. Meta's next virtual reality headset will be available sometime this fall and it'll start at $500. The company says the Quest 3 is its "most powerful headset yet." It will offer full-color passthrough to support mixed reality experiences. Meta CEO Mark Zuckerberg said the latest model will have twice the graphics performance of the Quest 2. The Quest 3 comes with redesigned Touch Plus controllers and hand-tracking support out of the gate. The company also noted that it's reducing the prices of the Quest 2 headsets on June 4th. Subscribe to our two newsletters:  - A weekly roundup of our favorite tech deals  - A daily dose of the news you need Please enter a valid email address Please select a newsletter By subscribing, you are agreeing to Engadget's Terms and Privacy Policy.
The company says it will appeal the fine from Ireland's Data Protection Commission.    Meta faces a hefty GDPR fine for its handling of children's data. Meta is facing a fine of 405 million euros, or just over $400 million, from Ireland's Data Protection Commission for failing to safeguard children's information on Instagram.  The country's data watchdog had accused Instagram of setting children's accounts to "public" by default and allowing children to operate business accounts on the platform, which could leave their phone numbers and email addresses exposed. Full details of the decision are expected to be published next week, a commission spokesman said Tuesday.  Meta confirmed the fine and said it plans to appeal the decision.  "This inquiry focused on old settings that we updated over a year ago, and we've since released many new features to help keep teens safe and their information private," a Meta spokesperson told CNET via email on Tuesday. "Anyone under 18 automatically has their account set to private when they join Instagram, so only people they know can see what they post, and adults can't message teens who don't follow them."  The spokesperson added that Meta disagrees with how the fine was calculated and is reviewing the rest of the commission's decision. The $400 million fine would be the second-largest issued to a tech company for a violation of the European Union's General Data Protection Regulation, behind Amazon's record-setting $888 million fine in 2021.
Jump to        Ireland's data watchdog the Data Protection Commission handed Meta a 405 million euro ($403 million) fine on Monday, the agency confirmed to Insider. The Irish DPC acts as the EU's regulator for several US tech giants including Meta because their headquarters are based in the country. The DPC fine was given to Instagram for failing to protect children's privacy on its platform. The fine was partly based on the fact Instagram had allowed children to operate business accounts on its platform. Instagram business accounts show the account holder's phone number and email address, meaning that data was exposed. The DPC also found the accounts of 13 to 17 year-olds were set to "public" as their default setting. A DPC spokesperson told Insider full details of the ruling will be published next week. A Meta spokesperson told Insider in a statement: "This inquiry focused on old settings that we updated over a year ago, and we've since released many new features to help keep teens safe and their information private." The spokesperson added Instagram users under the age of 18 automatically have their accounts set to "private" rather than "public." He added adult users can't privately message users under 18 unless they follow the adult's account. "While we've engaged fully with the DPC throughout their inquiry, we disagree with how this fine was calculated and intend to appeal it. We're continuing to carefully review the rest of the decision," the spokesperson added.
32] The Windows port was developed by Polish studio QLOC.[33]  Gotham Knights was revealed during a virtual event called DC FanDome in August 2020. The game was originally planned to be released in 2021 for PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Windows, Xbox One, and Xbox Series X/S,[34] but was delayed to 2022.[35][36] The PlayStation 4 and Xbox One versions were later cancelled.[31] The game was released on October 21.[37]  A comic book limited series—written by Evan Narcisse and illustrated by ABEL—titled Batman: Gotham Knights – Gilded City, serves as a tie-in and a prequel to Gotham Knights, exploring Batman's final case before his death. It was released on October 25 the same year, with subsequent issues releasing monthly.[38] Each issue of the limited series came with a code for an in-game item, as well as a seventh item given to those who purchase all six issues of the comic book.[39]  Gotham Knights received "mixed or average" reviews from critics, according to review aggregator Metacritic.[41][42][40] Game Informer praised the game for its co-op gameplay, but criticized its mission objectives, combat, and side activities.
With Batman and Commissioner Gordon dead, the Gotham Knights must rise up... The Gotham Knights release date is finally arriving this week, and everyone can soon play through the latest foray into Gotham City. Without Batman or Commissioner Gordon to protect the city following their deaths, the task is instead left up to the Bat-Family of Nightwing, Batgirl, Robin, and the Red Hood. In your way stands the mysterious secret society the Court of Owls. It's a decent game, too. In our three-star Gotham Knights review, we called it "a mixed bag" but noted that, "once you stop comparing it to Arkham in your head", you should find plenty to enjoy. Enough of our babbling, here's everything you need to know about Gotham Knights from its release date and trailers to how to pre-order it for yourself. Plus, is it on Game Pass? The Gotham Knights release date will take place on 21st October 2022, the developers have confirmed. You can buy your copy from the likes of Amazon. The game has already seen a number of different release dates come and go, but it looks like the delays are over and this one will stick! For console players, the Gotham Knights launch time in the UK is midnight BST, just as the clock ticks over to 21st October. PC players, meanwhile, have to wait until 5pm on 21st October to play the co-op game on either Steam or the Epic Games Store.
By          Karen Zamora       ,          Ashley Brown       Bernard Shaw, the pioneering Black journalist who served as CNN's chief anchor for 20 years, died on Wednesday from pneumonia. He was 82. AILSA CHANG, HOST:  This happens to be a day when journalists around the world are covering a big breaking news story.ARI SHAPIRO, HOST:  And it's a day we're pausing to remember a pioneering journalist who mastered the craft, Bernard Shaw. The longtime former news anchor died yesterday.BERNARD SHAW: I wanted to be the best broadcast journalist I could be. In all the years of preparing to become an anchor, one of the things I strove for was to be able to control my emotions in the midst of hell breaking out.CHANG: That's Shaw, also a former Marine, telling our NPR co-host Michel Martin about his ambitions back in 2014. His career began in his hometown, Chicago. He went on to report for CBS, ABC and in 1980 became the first chief anchor for a fledgling network called CNN.SHAPIRO: When the 1991 Gulf War began, he reported from Baghdad as bombs were going off.(SOUNDBITE OF ARCHIVED RECORDING)SHAW: Something is happening outside. Let's describe to our viewers what we're seeing. The skies over Baghdad have been illuminated.
12] Shaw, a sensitive boy, found the less salubrious parts of Dublin shocking and distressing, and was happier at the cottage. Lee's students often gave him books, which the young Shaw read avidly;[13] thus, as well as gaining a thorough musical knowledge of choral and operatic works, he became familiar with a wide spectrum of literature.[14]  Between 1865 and 1871, Shaw attended four schools, all of which he hated.[15][n 3] His experiences as a schoolboy left him disillusioned with formal education: "Schools and schoolmasters", he later wrote, were "prisons and turnkeys in which children are kept to prevent them disturbing and chaperoning their parents."[16] In October 1871 he left school to become a junior clerk in a Dublin firm of land agents, where he worked hard, and quickly rose to become head cashier.[6] During this period, Shaw was known as "George Shaw"; after 1876, he dropped the "George" and styled himself "Bernard Shaw".[n 4]  In June 1873, Lee left Dublin for London and never returned. A fortnight later, Bessie followed him; the two girls joined her.[6][n 5] Shaw's explanation of why his mother followed Lee was that without the latter's financial contribution the joint household had to be broken up.
Two days before her death, on 6 September 2022, the Queen accepted the resignation of Boris Johnson and appointed Liz Truss to succeed him as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom; these meetings took place at Balmoral Castle, rather than their usual location, Buckingham Palace.[22] At the meeting with Truss, the final public photos of the Queen were taken by Jane Barlow. Social media users were quick to observe the Queen’s continued use of a walking stick, her frail, “ghostly” appearance, and a large bruise-like mark on her right hand. After the Queen’s death, Barlow said that while she could tell the Queen was unwell, she was “in quite good spirits.” On 7 September, the Queen was scheduled to attend an online meeting of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom to swear in new ministers in Truss's government, but this was cancelled after she was advised by doctors to rest.[23] The Queen's final public statement, issued that same day, was a message of condolences for the victims of a mass stabbing incident in Saskatchewan, Canada.[24]  The Queen died at 15:10 BST on 8 September 2022 at the age of 96, ending her 70-year reign. According to her death certificate, which was made public on 29 September, she died of old age.[2] Her death was publicly announced at 18:30.
Queen Elizabeth II, the longest-reigning British monarch whose rule spanned seven decades, died on Thursday at the age of 96, Buckingham Palace has announced.           The Queen’s oldest son Charles has now become King Charles III.           “The Queen died peacefully at Balmoral this afternoon. The King and The Queen Consort will remain at Balmoral this evening and will return to London tomorrow,” the royal family said in a statement posted on its official Twitter account, referring to Charles as the new King for the first time.            The King said in a statement that the Queen’s death was “a moment of the greatest sadness for me and all members of my family.”     Elizabeth II:  The British Queen who weathered war and upheaval dies at 96         “We mourn profoundly the passing of a cherished Sovereign and a much-loved Mother. I know her loss will be deeply felt throughout the country, the Realms and the Commonwealth, and by countless people around the world,” he said in the statement.           Crowds of mourners gathered outside Balmoral Castle and other royal residences, despite heavy downpours in parts of the UK on Thursday evening. Many brought flowers and lit candles, some looking visibly shaken by the news.           In keeping with the royal tradition, a written statement announcing the Queen’s death was displayed on the gates of Buckingham Palace.
Becky Sullivan                        Queen Elizabeth II pictured in 2012.                                                           Eddie Mulholland /WPA Pool/Getty Images                                       hide caption  Queen Elizabeth II pictured in 2012. Queen Elizabeth II, whose seven decades on the throne of the United Kingdom was a longer reign than any other British monarch, has died at the age of 96. The queen "died peacefully" on Thursday afternoon at Balmoral Castle, her estate in the Scottish Highlands, royal family officials announced.  Her son Charles, 73, is now king and will be known as King Charles III. Officials said he remains at Balmoral and will return to London on Friday.  The Queen died peacefully at Balmoral this afternoon.The King and The Queen Consort will remain at Balmoral this evening and will return to London tomorrow. pic.twitter.com/VfxpXro22W "The death of my beloved Mother, Her Majesty The Queen, is a moment of the greatest sadness for me and all members of my family," the king said in a statement. "We mourn profoundly the passing of a cherished Sovereign and a much-loved Mother. I know her loss will be deeply felt throughout the country, the Realms and the Commonwealth, and by countless people around the world." Camilla, his second wife, will be known as queen consort.  Elizabeth had been placed under medical supervision earlier Thursday, officials said.
Elizabeth II (Elizabeth Alexandra Mary; 21 April 1926 – 8 September 2022) was Queen of the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth realms from 6 February 1952 until her death in 2022. She was queen regnant of 32 sovereign states over the course of her lifetime and remained the monarch of 15 realms by the time of her death. Her reign of over 70 years is the longest of any British monarch and the longest verified reign of any female head of state in history.  Elizabeth was born in Mayfair, London, as the first child of the Duke and Duchess of York (later King George VI and Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother). Her father acceded to the throne in 1936 upon the abdication of his brother Edward VIII, making the ten-year-old Princess Elizabeth the heir presumptive. She was educated privately at home and began to undertake public duties during the Second World War, serving in the Auxiliary Territorial Service. In November 1947, she married Philip Mountbatten, a former prince of Greece and Denmark, and their marriage lasted 73 years until his death in 2021. They had four children: Charles, Anne, Andrew, and Edward.
In all, Alcaraz has played 960 minutes so far this tournament, which, when mixed with his late finishes, could be a factor against Frances Tiafoe in the semifinal. Here’s a look at Alcaraz’s journey: Alcaraz got a bit of a break in the first round against Sebastian Baez, the Argentine ranked No. 37, on a particularly hot and humid day at the tournament. After Alcaraz took the first two sets, 7-5, 7-5, Baez was forced to retire in the third set, down two games to none, with an injury. After the match, Alcaraz said in a news conference that the conditions were “really tough.” “The heat was pretty tough, so I’m just really happy with the level and be able to play the second round,” he said. Alcaraz cruised through the first two sets of his second round match against Federico Coria, an Argentine ranked No. 78. In the third set, Alcaraz had to battle. Tied at 4-4, Alcaraz and Coria dueled out a 16-point game, which Alcaraz ultimately won. Alcaraz sealed the win swiftly in two hours and 10 minutes. Alcaraz had another quick match in the third round, beating Jenson Brooksby, an American ranked No. 43, in two hours and 11 minutes.
[1/5]Sept 7, 2022; Flushing, NY, USA; Carlos Alcaraz of Spain hits to Jannik Sinner of Italy on day ten of the 2022 U.S. Open tennis tournament at USTA Billie Jean King National Tennis Center. Robert Deutsch-USA TODAY Sports NEW YORK, Sept 8 (Reuters) - Carlos Alcaraz saved a match point in the fourth set before digging deep in the decider to beat Jannik Sinner in a five-set thriller and reach the U.S. Open semi-finals in the early hours of Thursday in New York. The Spanish teenager collapsed on his back after the match lasting more than five hours concluded at 2:50 a.m., beating the previous record for the latest finish of 2:26 a.m. set in three matches in 1993, 2012 and 2014. The 6-3 6-7(7) 6-7(0) 7-5 6-3 win keeps alive Alcaraz's hopes of winning a maiden Grand Slam title and claiming the world number one ranking. "Honestly I still don't know how I did it," Alcaraz said in an on-court interview. "The level that I played, the level of the match, the high quality of tennis. "It's unbelievable.
Watch CBS News              By Haley Ott, Tucker Reals             Updated on:  May 6, 2023 / 9:07 PM           / CBS News          London — King Charles III and his wife, Queen Camilla, were both formally crowned Saturday in a historic ceremony at London's Westminster Abbey before appearing on the balcony for a flyover.  The coronation ceremony, steeped in centuries of tradition but with a few small tweaks for the modern age, played out in front of about 2,000 invited guests and a global audience of millions watching on TV or livestream. Though Charles officially became king following the death of his mother, Queen Elizabeth II, on Sept. 8, 2022, today's coronation ceremony consecrated and celebrated his ascent to the throne. Follow along below for the latest updates as the ceremony unfolded:  King Charles and Queen Camilla stepped out onto the balcony of Buckingham Palace Saturday with other senior members of their family to watch a military fly-past and greet members of the public. They were joined by other "working" members of the royal family, including William and Kate, the Prince and Princess of Wales, and their children.  As part of the "slimmed down" coronation day events requested by the king, not all members of their large family joined them.
King Charles’s Coronation Live Updates: Follow Along with Vogue’s Live Coverage How to Watch the Coronation of King Charles III What to Look Out for at King Charles’s Coronation Everything You Need to Know About King Charles’s Coronation A Who’s Who of European Royals to Look Out for at the Coronation Charming, Approachable, and a Great Dancer: Friends of Vogue on the Real King Charles III By signing up you agree to our User Agreement and Privacy Policy & Cookie Statement. By Tish Weinstock By Tish Weinstock By Tish Weinstock By Nell Frizzell By Alex Kessler By Kerry McDermott More from Vogue See More Stories © 2023 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement and Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement and Your California Privacy Rights. Vogue may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
The upcoming Fox series boasts strong ties to the real Nashville, including cameos by a host of country stars and a theme song by Music City songwriting royalty  Trace Adkins says he truly met his match when he was offered the role of Albie Roman, the patriarch in Monarch, the much-anticipated Fox primetime drama set in the country music scene.   "He's very much like me," the 60-year-old country hitmaker tells PEOPLE. "I mean, I can look back over periods in my life where the train was perpetually off the track, and that's Albie's world. The train is perpetually off the track. Sometimes it's his fault, sometimes it's not, but he has to deal with that stuff."   Indeed, Adkins has had his share of tabloid headlines over the years — but forgive him for forgetting one more glaringly obvious reason that the part fits him to a T: The singer and his character are both big-time country stars. And obviously, Adkins' casting is just one of the ways the show, which is set in Austin, is sure to bring a country music authenticity to what promises to be one of the fall's hottest — and steamiest — new shows.
Susan Sarandon and Trace Adkins lead the star-studded cast. The new country musical series Monarch hasn't even premiered yet but it's already at the top of our TV watch list! The trailer for the upcoming Fox show is filled with plenty of action and drama—the kind that will definitely appeal to fans of shows like Yellowstone and Nashville. Monarch will make its debut on September 11 so be sure to mark your calendars and maybe even prepare a menu of cowboy food for the big event! In the meantime, as we all await the premiere, let's take some time to get to know the talented actors that make up Monarch's cast. This show is loaded with seasoned Hollywood and country music stars, as well as newcomers offering fresh charisma for the camera. Those who have seen the trailer already know that Oscar-award-winning legend Susan Sarandon and country music singer Trace Adkins will star alongside each other in the upcoming series. But we're providing a little more information on their characters, as well as details about the rest of the cast. (By the way, in addition to these stars, you can also look forward to special appearances from country greats Shania Twain, Martina McBride, Little Big Town, and more!) Who are you most excited to see on  Monarch? Let us know in the comments and make sure you're tuned in and ready to watch in September! Sarandon will take the lead role as country music queen Dottie Roman.
List of iPhone models  The iPhone 14 and iPhone 14 Plus are smartphones designed, developed, and marketed by Apple Inc. They are the sixteenth and latest generation of iPhones, succeeding the iPhone 13 and iPhone 13 Mini, and were announced during Apple Event, Apple Park in Cupertino, California, on September 7, 2022, alongside the higher-priced iPhone 14 Pro and iPhone 14 Pro Max flagships. The iPhone 14 and iPhone 14 Plus feature a 6.1-inch (15 cm) and 6.7-inch (17 cm) display, improvements to the rear-facing camera, and satellite connectivity for contacting emergency services when a user in trouble is beyond the range of Wi-Fi or cellular networks.[10][11] The iPhone 14 was made available on September 16, 2022,[12] and iPhone 14 Plus was made available on October 7, 2022, priced at $799 and $899 respectively and was launched with iOS 16.[7][13] Pre-orders for the iPhone 14 and iPhone 14 Plus began on September 9, 2022.[14]  The iPhone 14 does not have a "Mini" version like its predecessor, the iPhone 13 Mini. Instead, Apple has reintroduced a larger dimension iPhone 14 named the iPhone 14 Plus. Apple has not introduced a Plus model iPhone since the iPhone 8 Plus in 2017.
Pre-orders begin Friday, September 9, with availability for iPhone 14 beginning Friday, September 16, and availability for iPhone 14 Plus beginning Friday, October 7. “Our customers rely on their iPhone every day, and iPhone 14 and iPhone 14 Plus introduce groundbreaking new technologies and important safety capabilities. With the new, larger 6.7-inch display on iPhone 14 Plus, users can enjoy more content onscreen when browsing the web and even more text,” said Greg Joswiak, Apple’s senior vice president of Worldwide Marketing. “Both phones have a powerful new Main camera with a huge leap in low-light performance, advanced connectivity capabilities with 5G and eSIM, and the incredible performance of A15 Bionic, which helps enable even better battery life. All of this, tightly integrated with iOS 16, makes iPhone more essential than ever.”   A Beautiful and Durable Design with Amazing Battery Life Available in the popular 6.1-inch size and a stunning new 6.7-inch size,2 iPhone 14 and iPhone 14 Plus feature a durable and sleek aerospace-grade aluminum design in five beautiful finishes. The larger display of iPhone 14 Plus is great for streaming movies and playing games, and iPhone 14 Plus boasts the best battery life ever in an iPhone.
Susie hopes to become an internet sensation, and make enough money to give her and her mother, now bed-ridden with MS, a more comfortable life. But “Susie Searches” isn’t taking off as hoped, unlike the meditation site hosted by campus hunk Jesse (Alex Wolff). When Jesse suddenly goes missing, Susie seizes the opportunity to solve the mystery and make “Susie Searches” a hit. Cute and colorful, SUSIE SEARCHES is a “girl detective” mystery story in the Nancy Drew mode – until it isn’t. Actor-turned-director Sophie Kargman turns this sunny tale in a wholly unexpected direction. As Susie, Kiersey Clemons is impressive, as the title character finds her way through the plot’s twists. In her feature film directorial debut, Kargman takes the script she co-wrote with William Day Frank and the idea of their short film, and transforms it into a tale you don’t see coming, until it is right upon you.
FILM DETAILS: Title: Susie Searches Director: Sophie Kargman Release Date: July 28, 2023 Running Time: 105 minutes Language:  English Screenwriter: Sophie Kargman Distribution Company: Vertical Entertainment AWFJ Movie of the Week Panel Members: Sandie Angulo Chen, Betsy Bozdech, Jamie Broadnax, Leslie Combemale, Nikki Fowler, Pam Grady, Loren King, Cate Marquis, Jennifer Merin, Nell Minow, Sherin Nicole, Liz Whittemore  Previous #MOTW Selections Other Movies Opening This Week Edited by Jennifer Merin Jennifer Merin  is the Film Critic for Womens eNews and contributes the CINEMA CITIZEN blog for and is managing editor for Women on Film, the online magazine of the Alliance of Women Film Journalists, of which she is President. She has served as a regular critic and film-related interviewer for The New York Press and About.com. She has written about entertainment for USA Today, The L.A. Times, US Magazine, Ms. Magazine, Endless Vacation  Magazine, Daily News, New York Post, SoHo News and other publications.
Spice up your morning routine with the Spicy Chicken Biscuit 												    													How to cater your summer gathering with Chick-fil-A 												    													Celebrating the Cows 												    													Code Moo: The Cows are back at Chick-fil-A 												   					Please enter an address 				  					Please enter an address 				   				Sep 8, 2022 			   							News 						   					Seasonal-favorite and new fall treat to join menu for a limited time, starting Sept. 12  				 ATLANTA (September 8, 2022) – Chick-fil-A® is embracing the flavors of fall with the debut of the new Autumn Spice Milkshake — its first new milkshake flavor available chainwide in four years — and the return of the Grilled Spicy Deluxe Sandwich. These seasonal fall items will be available nationwide* from Sept. 12 through Nov. 12, while supplies last.   Autumn spice & everything nice   The Autumn Spice Milkshake mixes rich flavors like cinnamon with crunchy bits of brown sugar cookies. Made with Chick-fil-A Icedream® dessert and hand spun, the Autumn Spice Milkshake is topped off with whipped cream and a cherry*.
Code Moo may be over, but you can keep the cow fun going by shopping our limited merchandise. 			  				Chick-fil-A eGift Card 			     Shop eGift cards       From breakfast items, party trays to packaged meals, Chick-fil-A® Catering has something for every occasion.  From breakfast items, party trays to packaged meals, Chick-fil-A® Catering has something for every occasion.  				Rewards 			   Order ahead on the app or online, and receive points from qualifying purchases. Then, use those points to redeem available rewards. 			    				You never know when the smallest thing can make someone’s day. Discover how our Chick-fil-A® Team Members bring #thelittlethings to our customers. 			  The Chick-fil-A App is not presently accepted at Chick-fil-A Express™ and Chick-fil-A licensed locations such as those in airports and college campuses. These locations are operated by professional third-party food contractors and their operating systems do not currently offer guests the ability to receive points or redeem rewards through the Chick-fil-A App.  Already have an account?
36  Editor’s Note: This story is included in The Athletic’s Best of 2022. View the full list.  Kyle Busch will join Richard Childress Racing in 2023, multiple sources told The Athletic, ending a highly successful tenure at Joe Gibbs Racing that saw the driver-team pairing win two Cup Series championships and 56 races over a 15-year span. An official announcement is expected Tuesday. Advertisement Busch is making the move following prolonged negotiations with JGR and several teams that led to much discourse on which team he’d sign with. The 37-year-old Busch is in the final season of a multiyear contract with JGR and the two sides had been negotiating a contract extension for some time. However, those discussions were hampered because JGR had not secured a primary sponsor for Busch’s No. 18 team beyond this season. The team’s current primary sponsor, Mars Inc., is leaving JGR at the conclusion of the 2022 season after sponsoring Busch since he began his tenure with JGR in 2008. JGR has known of Mars’ eventual departure since last summer and has been working to find a replacement. That search complicated discussions with Busch regarding a contract extension as the team was uncertain what it could commit financially to re-signing Busch.
His career average finish is 13.8, and no full-time RCR driver has reached that mark since Ryan Newman in 2015. And on top of driving for RCR, his deal is also leading him to swap manufacturers for Kyle Busch Motorsports in the Craftsman Truck Series. His team will be branded by Chevrolet in 2023, a major overhaul with Chase Purdy and Jack Wood joining the team. Fortunately for Busch, he will not have to worry about finding sponsors at RCR. 3CHI, Alsco, BetMGM, Cheddars and Lenovo have all confirmed they will sponsor the No. 8 car. And if anyone can bring back a championship trophy to RCR, it will be Busch.
Alcaraz and Medvedev are the first pair of players to debut at No. 1 in the same season since Roddick and Juan Carlos Ferrero in 2003. At least seven players 25-and-under finished in the Top 10 for the second year in a row (8 in 2021). Joining Alcaraz, Auger-Aliassime and Fritz in the 2022 year-end Top 10 are 23-year-old Casper Ruud of Norway, 24-year-old Stefanos Tsitsipas of Greece and 25-year-olds Andrey Rublev and Hubert Hurkacz. 2022 Year-End Pepperstone ATP Rankings Top 10 1) Carlos Alcaraz – Second Spanish year-end No. 1, joining five-time year-end No. 1 Rafael Nadal 2) Rafael Nadal – Ends year at No. 2 for eighth time and in Top 2 for record 13th time 3) Casper Ruud – Best year-end ranking for a Scandinavian player since No.
7, but that’s all because of Wimbledon. He’s playing like the No. 1 player in the world. It’s not apples to apples like other years.” Under the normal points system, Djokovic might not even qualify for the ATP Finals in Turin, Italy, this year. Heading into Paris, he was in 10th place in the points race. But under the ATP’s Grand Slam champion rule, any player who wins a major title and is ranked within the top 20 is guaranteed a spot in the year-end championship. (The WTA Tour has no such rule, which is why Djokovic’s fellow Wimbledon champion, Elena Rybakina, did not qualify for the WTA Finals in Fort Worth.) “Most of the upheaval this year is because of Djokovic,” Patrick McEnroe, a former United States Davis Cup captain and now an ESPN commentator said. “He missed two majors and didn’t get points for the one he won. It really affected the rest of the field. You could make the case that if Djokovic runs the table, wins Paris and the ATP Finals, that he deserves to be No. 1.” The player most likely to end 2022 at No. 1 is Alcaraz. So far he has won five tournaments this year, including ATP Masters 1000s in Miami and Madrid. In Madrid, he beat Nadal, Djokovic and Alexander Zverev in succession.
Superhero stories are so common in movies and TV now that you can't expect every actor involved in such a production to be a lifelong fan of the material, but sometimes you get lucky. Titans showrunner Greg Walker previously told EW that when he reached out to actor Titus Welliver about portraying iconic DC supervillain Lex Luthor in season 4, he was surprised to find that Welliver was already well-versed in the comic book history of the Teen Titans.  "I've been collecting comic books since I was 7 or 8 years old," Welliver tells EW. "I'm 60 now, so that's a lot of comic books."  He has the nerd knowledge to prove it, too. Check out EW's conversation with Welliver about Luthor and all things Titans below.  ENTERTAINMENT WEEKLY: What first got you interested in the Teen Titans?  TITUS WELLIVER: I love the period in the late '60s and the '70s when they're less clean-cut, their hair is longer, they're kind of hip, they're go-go dancing. I had always read the comics. I mean, I have all the omnibuses, plus I still have all of my original collection.  So when somebody calls you up on the phone and says, "Do you want to play Lex Luthor?" The immediate answer is yes.
Subscribe for full access to The Hollywood Reporter Subscribe for full access to The Hollywood Reporter The actor discusses how he shaped a new version of the villain, including his Einstein and 'Jaws' influences, as well as the significance of Superman's absence for both the show and Superboy.   							By   	Abbey White  Associate Editor & News Writer  [This story contains spoilers for the premiere episode of Titans season four “Lex Luthor.”]  	In its season four return, HBO Max’s Titans introduces Lex Luthor, one of Superman’s greatest foes, and in the same hour kills him off.     	But before he goes, in yet another unexpected twist, Lex — who is revealed to have a terminal illness — leaves Joshua Orpin’s Superboy his empire and legacy, Lexcorp. Lex’s arrival is not only surprising for the Titan, but comes at a particularly interesting time after Superman fails to show up for the young hero.   	            	 	 		 					Related Stories		 	             	 	TV 			    	 		 					'Bosch: Legacy' Nabs Third Season at Amazon Freevee		 			               	 	TV 			    	 		 					'Titans,' 'Doom Patrol' Ending on HBO Max
Anurag PalStudy Abroad Expert Established in 1754, Columbia University is a part of the prestigious group of Ivy League Universities. Located in New York, Columbia University is one of the oldest universities in the United States of America. If we talk about Columbia University rankings, then according to the Times Higher Education (THE) World University Rankings 2023, the university has been placed at the 11th position. In 2022 too, the university was placed at the same position i.e. 11th. Columbia University has been placed in the top 20 positions since 5 years (2018-2022). THE considers the parameters like teaching, research, citations, industry outcome, and international outlook for the rankings of the universities. If we consider Columbia University world ranking, then as per QS World University Rankings 2023, the university is placed at the 22nd position. If we compare the university’s ranking with 2022, then its position has declined. In 2022, it was placed at the 19th position. The indicators that are considered for evaluating the QS World University Rankings include academic reputation, employer reputation, citations per faculty, faculty / student ratio, and international student ratio & international faculty ratio. Read: Columbia University Admissions 2023 Considering Columbia University’s rankings by U.S.
Columbia University To learn more about this year’s edition of the QS World University Rankings: by Subject 2023, download the March edition of QS Insights Magazine: Swimming with Sharks. This edition features ‘The Rankings Supplement’, in which Drew MacFarlane, QS Rankings Manager, explores interesting trends in the QS Subject Rankings, showcases specialised institutions and highlights emerging fields such as Data Science, Marketing, and Dentistry.  Please enable JavaScript to submit this form. Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
By subscribing, I agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA Enterprise and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.					 “Squid Game” continues to take the world by storm with star Lee Jung-jae becoming the first Asian actor to win the Emmy for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series. The South Korean star of Netflix’s most popular show ever collected the award in person on Sunday night. Lee’s lead performance in the international hit action drama was nominated against Bob Odenkirk for “Better Call Saul,” Adam Scott for “Severance,” Jason Bateman for “Ozark,” and Brian Cox and Jeremy Strong from “Succession” (the latter of which was the 2020 winner for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series). On “Squid Game,” the charismatic actor played the blundering Seong Gi-hun who, after he was unable to pay off all his debts, was kidnapped and manipulated into competing in a competition with real life or death stakes. Last competitor left standing wins a seismic cash prize.                Lee’s Emmy win is not only historic, but it may prove to be a turning point for recognition of non-English language projects.
Another tweet called Ahmed a “trailblazer for all Asian and young people, proving it is possible to reach those lofty heights.” So happy for @rizmc and @azizansari tonight!! Representing for the South Asian community!!! So proud of you both!! #Emmys2017 #Emmys Two brown Muslimish guys back to back on #EMMY2017 Aziz ansari +Kumail nanjiani. In between a black lesbian won Emmy-Its the best of America As reviewers and commentators noted, this year’s Emmys show that Hollywood has made major strides in its inclusion of South Asian Americans. Not long ago, most roles for South Asians were bit parts, and included “terrorists cab drivers and the odd medical professional,” as The Post’s Lavanya Ramanathan wrote last month. “A major metropolitan newspaper once counted Apu from ‘The Simpsons’ as a South Asian role — that’s how bad it was,” Ramanathan wrote. Mindy Kaling’s “The Mindy Project” was the first show written by and starring an Indian American woman. An Indian American comedian, Hasan Minhaj, hosted the White House Correspondents’ Association Dinner. And “The Big Sick” — whose protagonist, Kumail Nanjiani, is Pakistani American — was a hit film this summer.
Google has announced that its proposed $5.4 billion bid to buy cybersecurity firm Mandiant is now complete. The internet giant revealed plans to acquire publicly traded Mandiant back in March, less than a year after Mandiant was spun out of its previous owner FireEye as part of a $1.2 billion deal with private equity firm Symphony Technology Group. Moving forward, Mandiant will operate under the auspices of Google Cloud, though the Mandiant brand will live on. “We will retain the Mandiant brand and continue Mandiant’s mission to make every organization secure from cyber threats and confident in their readiness,” Google Cloud CEO Thomas Kurian wrote in a blog post. Mandiant dashboard. Image Credits: Mandiant Mandiant dashboard. Image Credits: Mandiant As one of the so-called “big three” public cloud providers alongside Amazon and Microsoft, Google’s big promise to would-be customers is that it will keep all their data and infrastructure secure. This means continually introducing new products to address the ever-changing threat landscape, thought it sometimes means acquiring long-established incumbents with the expertise to bolster Google’s security proposition. And that’s effectively what Google’s getting with Mandiant, giving it a major boost in terms of security data gathering capabilities, not to mention access to hundreds of security personnel.
Mandiant will join Google's cloud computing division, which is yet to grow to the same size as Microsoft Azure or Amazon Web Services. "Organizations around the world are facing unprecedented cybersecurity challenges as the sophistication and severity of attacks that were previously used to target major governments are now being used to target companies in every industry," said Thomas Kurian, CEO of Google Cloud, in a statement. He added: "We look forward to welcoming Mandiant to Google Cloud to further enhance our security operations suite and advisory services, and help customers address their most important security challenges." The deal is expected to close later this year. Shares of Mandiant closed up 16% on Monday after The Information reported that Google was interested in acquiring the company. Mandiant, which has a market value around $5.25 billion, was previously under the FireEye umbrella before that brand was sold. FireEye was credited with helping Microsoft discover the SolarWinds hack that attacked government systems in 2019 and 2020. Wedbush analyst Dan Ives said in a note to investors Tuesday, "With cyber attacks increasing by the day and cyber warfare underway from Russia/state sponsored cyber terrorism organizations, Google is doubling down on its cyber security footprint at the right time with Mandiant and looking to differentiate itself from the likes of behemoths Microsoft and Amazon in the cloud arms race.
Profile Sections tv Featured More From NBC Follow NBC News Inflation was little changed in the month of August, despite efforts by the Federal Reserve to cool off the U.S. economy. Data released Tuesday by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics showed that inflation landed at 8.3% last month compared to one year ago. Economists surveyed by Bloomberg had forecast an 8.1% annual increase. Prices increased 8.5% in July.  Excluding volatile food and gas prices, inflation climbed 6.3% year-on-year — higher than the consensus estimate for 6.1% and an increase from last month's 5.9% reading.  The energy index rose 23.8% over the past 12 months. That includes the cost of electricity, which saw its largest one-year increase (15.8%) in four decades, according to the data.  Other categories that saw increases in August include motor vehicle maintenance and repair, up 1.7%; health insurance, up 2.4%; and pets and pet products, up 1.6% in the 30-day period between July and August.    Gas prices have fallen for three consecutive months and now stand at a national average of $3.70 a gallon, though there is wide geographic variability, with most Western states still above $4. But food prices have remained stubbornly elevated, climbing 11.
The annual inflation rate for the United States was 3.0% for the 12 months ended June, according to U.S. Labor Department data published on July 12, 2023. This follows a rise of 4.0% in the previous period. The next update on inflation is scheduled for release on Aug. 10 at 8:30 a.m. ET. It will provide information on the rate of inflation for the 12 months ended July 2023. Below is a chart and table displaying annual US inflation rates for calendar years from 2000 and 2013 to 2023. For inflation rates in prior years, please refer to historical inflation rates. If you would like to calculate the accumulated rates between two different dates, you can use the US Inflation Calculator.  *The latest inflation data (12-month based) is always displayed in the chart’s final column. Table: Annual Inflation Rates To find annual inflation rates for a calendar year, look to the December column. For instance, the inflation rate in 2022 was 6.5%. Meanwhile, the "Ave" column shows the average inflation rate for each year using CPI data. In 2022, the average inflation rate was 8.0%. These average rates are published by the BLS but are rarely discussed in the news media, taking a back seat to the actual rate of inflation for a given calendar year. *Data Source: U.S.
Tuesday, Sept.  13, 2022		   Gayle King, the award-winning co-host of “CBS Mornings,” has been chosen to receive the 39th Walter Cronkite Award for Excellence in Journalism, Arizona State University officials announced today. King, who is also editor-at-large of Oprah Daily and hosts a live, weekly radio show titled “Gayle King in the House” on SiriusXM, will be honored during a ceremony in Phoenix on Feb. 21, 2023, at the Sheraton Phoenix Downtown. The Cronkite Award — named after the late CBS News anchor — has honored prominent journalists since 1984. The award recognizes the recipients’ accomplishments and leadership over the course of their careers. Registration is now open for the Walter Cronkite Award for Excellence in Journalism luncheon.   “Gayle King’s career and accomplishments are remarkable, and her professionalism embodies everything that Walter Cronkite valued in journalism,” said Cronkite School Dean Battinto L. Batts Jr. “Her approach to covering important events and interviewing politicians, leaders and celebrities is unparalleled. It’s an honor to present Gayle with this prestigious award.”  “I am honored to accept the Walter Cronkite Award for Excellence in Journalism. The work myself and other journalists do is important, but I don’t do it alone.
For background on what this honor truly means, every year Arizona State University’s Walter Cronkite School of Journalism and Mass Communication presents “a leading figure in journalism…with the prestigious…[a]ward…The recipient list reads like a Who’s Who of the media world: Al Roker, Tom Brokaw, Ted Turner, Bob Woodward, Bill Moyers, Katharine Graham, Allen Neuharth, Don Hewitt, Helen Thomas, George Will, Ben Bradlee, Bernard Shaw and Roone Arledge, just to name a few,” and Anderson Cooper was the 2018 recipient.  The inaugural Walter Cronkite Award for Excellence in Journalism was bestowed in 1984, and is named for Walter Cronkite, a broadcast legend, who is said to have “set the standards of television news when the medium was new and malleable. He was loyal to those standards, and his large audience was correspondingly loyal to him.” Director Sydney Lumet even said that Cronkite “seemed to me incorruptible…in a profession that was easily corruptible.” ESSENCE.com is part of ESSENCE Communications, Inc. Essence may receive compensation for some links to products and services on this website.  Offers may be subject to change without notice. ©2023 ESSENCE Communications Inc.  All Rights Reserved.  |  Privacy Policy  |  Terms of Use  |  Essence.com Advertising Terms
A sequel was announced at E3 2019[218] with the title later revealed to be The Legend of Zelda: Tears of the Kingdom.[219] It was conceived during planning for Breath of the Wild's DLC; the team came up with too many ideas, some of which could not be implemented due to technical constraints, so used them for a new game. According to Aonuma, the sequel will build atop the original's world with a new story and gameplay elements,[220] and is inspired in part by Red Dead Redemption 2.[221] Fujibayashi will reprise his role as director.[222] Originally set to be released in 2022, the game was delayed to early 2023.[223][224] The game was released on May 12, 2023.[219]
The original release date for the game was due to be this year (2022). However, we all know that these release dates aren't set in stone. The Breath of the Wild sequel was confirmed to be pushed back to spring 2023 in an announcement from series producer, Eiji Aonuma.  The Legend of Zelda series producer, Eiji Aonuma, has an update to share about the launch timing of the sequel to The Legend of #Zelda: Breath of the Wild. Please take a look. pic.twitter.com/7OhayhiuM9 He said: "For those of you who have been looking forward to a release this year, we apologise."  "As previously announced, the adventure in this sequel will take place not just on the ground as in the previous game, but also in the skies above. However, the expanded world goes beyond that, and there will be an even wider variety of features you can enjoy, including new encounters and new gameplay elements." So we're going to have to wait a little longer to find out the official name, as well as get our hands on the game itself.    Discover GGRecon Welcome to a place where words matter. On GGRecon, smart voices & original ideas take centre stage. Welcome to a place where words matter. On GGRecon, smart voices & original ideas take centre stage.
When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works. All of The Legend of Zelda: Tears of the Kingdom tips, tricks, and details you need while you play Our Legend of Zelda: Tears of the Kingdom guide is your one-stop shop for all your Hyrule adventures. It's going to be one of the biggest games of the year, and for good reason. Nintendo is returning to the sprawling sandbox version of Hyrule we first enjoyed in Zelda: Breath of the Wild, expanding it to include a kingdom above the clouds.  As the sequel to one of the best Switch games, Tears of the Kingdom expands on what came before by taking us to the skies above Hyrule, as well as offering up new items to play around with. Read on below as we take you through everything you need to know when playing Legend of Zelda: Tears of the Kingdom.    Zelda: Tears of the Kingdom release date  The Tears of the Kingdom release date was May 12, 2023. The original RRP was $69.99 / £59.99 for the standard edition, but the Collector's Edition was $129.99 / £109.99. Zelda: Tears of the Kingdom release date  The Tears of the Kingdom release date was May 12, 2023. The original RRP was $69.99 / £59.99 for the standard edition, but the Collector's Edition was $129.
The Legend of Zelda: Tears of the Kingdom[b] is a 2023 action-adventure game developed and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo Switch. The sequel to The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild (2017), Tears of the Kingdom retains aspects including the open world of Hyrule, which has been expanded to allow for more vertical exploration. The player controls Link as he searches for Princess Zelda and fights to prevent the Demon King from destroying the world.  Tears of the Kingdom was conceived after ideas for Breath of the Wild downloadable content (DLC) had exceeded its scope. Its development was led by Nintendo's Entertainment Planning & Development (EPD) division, specifically Production Group Number 3,[1] with Breath of the Wild director Hidemaro Fujibayashi and producer Eiji Aonuma reprising their roles. A teaser was shown at E3 2019 with a full reveal at E3 2021. Tears of the Kingdom was initially planned for release in 2022 before being delayed to May 2023. It received acclaim for its improvements, expanded open world, and features encouraging exploration and experimentation. It sold more than 10 million copies in its first three days of release, and had sold over 18.5 million copies by June 2023.[2]  Tears of the Kingdom retains the open-world action-adventure gameplay of the previous Zelda game, Breath of the Wild (2017).
Our expert, award-winning staff selects the products we cover and rigorously researches and tests our top picks. If you buy through our links, we may get a commission. Reviews ethics statement      Hocus Pocus 2 is out now on Disney's streaming service.    Kathy Najimy, Bette Midler and Sarah Jessica Parker fly (again).  If, like the Sanderson sisters, you've been waiting three centuries for the Hocus Pocus franchise to be resurrected (or even just 29 years since the first movie), good news: Hocus Pocus 2 is out today. The long-awaited second installment of the classic Halloween movie hit Disney's streaming service Disney Plus at midnight PT/ 3 a.m. ET on Sept. 30, just in time for spooky season. Starring the original Sanderson Sisters from the first movie released in 1993 -- Bette Midler, Sarah Jessica Parker and Kathy Najimy -- the sequel sees the witches resurrected again as the black flame candle is lit once more in Salem. Check out our review of Hocus Pocus 2, and stream it on Disney Plus now.
Doug Jones will also be returning as Billy Butcherson alongside with a number of new cast members, including Hannah Waddingham, Tony Hale, Sam Richardson, Juju Brener, Froy Gutierrez, Taylor Paige Henderson, and Nina Kitchen.          “Hocus Pocus 2” is being directed by Anne Fletcher (“The Proposal,” “27 Dresses”), who took over the directing responsibilities from her friend and colleague Adam Shankman (“Hairspray,” “The Wedding Planner”), with Lynn Harris (“The Shallows”) serving as producer. Shankman is currently in production on “Disenchanted” for the studio, which he is directing, but has has remained on this project as an executive producer along with Ralph Winter (“Adrift”) and David Kirschner (“Curse of Chucky”). Steven Haft (“Tigerland”) is co-producer. Are you looking forward to “Hocus Pocus 2” arriving on Disney+ this Halloween season? I cannot wait for HP2 … and delighted that the original Sanderson sister will be back.  I loved the first HP completely spell bounded me. So I was one that wanted HP2 to go ahead .  Love love love everything HP 🧙🏻🧙🏻🧙🏻🕸🕷✨
Toronto, CanadaJuly 9-14, 2023  The 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL’23) will take place in Toronto, Canada from July 9th to July 14th, 2023. More information will be announced soon. All papers in the program must have at least one author registered at the appropriate rate for their presentation modality and status. Please see the registration page for more details.
As the lights faded Sunday on the 2022 edition of the Austin City Limits Music Festival, organizers announced the dates for next year's event. ACL Fest will take place on October 6-8 and October 13-15, 2023. Photos:See P!nk soar at ACL Fest No word on when tickets might go on sale, but in some years, festival organizers have dropped a small batch of early bird tickets before the end of the year, followed by the main ticket release in late spring when the lineup for next year's event is announced. Photos:Lil Nas X brings stunning fashion and spectacular dance to ACL Fest It is far too early to start speculating about next year's lineup, but we will note that C3 Presents, the company behind the festival, has announced the lineup for next year's Latin American Lollapaloozas. The events, which take place in Argentina, Chile and Brazil in March, will be headlined by Drake, Billie Eilish, Blink-182, Tame Impala, Rosalía and Lil Nas X. Billie and Nas just headlined the fest and the Blink-sters are playing the Moody Center next July. But Drake, Tame Impala and Rosalía all seem like solid bets for next year's lineup.
A multicultural metropolis on the shores of Lake Ontario, Toronto is Canada’s centre for arts, food, business and fun – all under the watchful gaze of the iconic CN Tower. Please visit here for more details. ACL 2023 will take place in the Westin Harbour Castle, Toronto:  Please use the direct hotel link to see if they have availability or search Bookings.com for other accommodations. We recommend you not hold off on booking as the Downtown area has a lot of events taking place the week of the ACL Conference.
OCT 6-8 & 13-15, 2023 ZILKER PARK AUSTIN, TX OCT 6-8 & 13-15, 2023 ZILKER PARK AUSTIN, TX Home Lineup Premium Experiences Help Buy Merch Reserve Locker Book Hotel OCT 6-8 & 13-15, 2023 ZILKER PARK AUSTIN, TX OCT 6-8 & 13-15, 2023 ZILKER PARK AUSTIN, TX ACL Festival features a diverse lineup of acts every year with 9 stages, 100+ performances — and best of all, two weekends. Tacos, brews, vegan options and more. The ACL Eats Food Court at ACL Fest offers the most delicious festival food, drinks and sweets from Austin and the surrounding area’s favorite restaurants. There’s plenty to do in between sets, including a mini-fest for kids, photogenic spaces, sponsored giveaways and merch to bring home with you. Take your ACL Fest experience to the next level with our GA+, VIP and Platinum Tickets. Enjoy prime views, luxury indulgences and getaways from the crowd.
Singapore December 6 –10, 2023  EMNLP 2023 will take place in Singapore from Dec 6th to Dec 10th, 2023. More information will be announced soon. All deadlines are 11.59 pm UTC -12h (“anywhere on Earth”).
The NLLP Workshop 2023 will take place on 7 December 2023 and will be co-located with the EMNLP 2023 conference in Singapore. The full call for papers can be found here. To submit a paper, please access the submission link. All deadlines are 11.
Singapore December 6 –10, 2023  EMNLP 2023 will take place in Singapore from Dec 6th to Dec 10th, 2023. More information will be announced soon. All deadlines are 11.59 pm UTC -12h (“anywhere on Earth”).
The paper title, author names, contact details, and a brief abstract must be submitted electronically through the EMNLP 2023 paper submission site by the abstract submission deadline (June 16). It will be possible to make minor edits to the title and abstract until the full paper submission deadline, but you cannot change authors and subject areas. As this is the first time the main conference is using OpenReview as platform, which requires to create an account prior to submission, we will exceptionally allow modifications to the list of authors between the abstract deadline and the paper submission deadline. No further changes to the author list will be allowed after the paper submission deadline. Submissions with “placeholder” abstracts will be removed without consideration; Important: if you miss the abstract submission deadline, then you cannot submit the full paper. EMNLP 2023 has the goal of a broad technical program. Relevant topics for the conference include, but are not limited to, the following areas (in alphabetical order): Submission is electronic, using the OpenReview conference management system. Both long and short papers must follow the EMNLP 2023 two-column format, using the supplied official style files. The templates can be downloaded in Style Files and Formatting. Please do not modify these style files, nor should you use templates designed for other conferences. Submissions that do not conform to the required styles, including paper size, margin width, and font size restrictions, will be rejected without review.
All new season tickets will require a gift of $25 per seat to the Hokie Scholarship Fund, ensuring your support of the Hokies extends beyond the final whistle. Season ticket holders may be required to pay an additional per seat donation at the time of selecting seats, depending on seat location and other gifts made to the Hokie Scholarship Fund ahead of March 31, 2021.     Want more information on Virginia Tech football season tickets? Join our interest list today and a Hokie Ticket Office representative will reach out with more details.             Buy Tickets  800 VA TECH 4  Request Info Enjoy exclusive benefits all year long and get the best value for your dollar with season tickets to Virginia Tech football. Starting at just $350, season tickets guarantee admission to all seven home games in 2021, including Notre Dame and ACC foes North Carolina, Pitt, Syracuse, and Duke. A full list of benefits and features includes: Hokie football season tickets range from $350 to $450, with pricing remaining the same as the 2020 season. New season tickets purchased for the 2021 season will be secured at the $350 price point,  with the option to select seats in the summer and pay the difference in ticket cost at that time. Season ticket holders will have three payment options in 2021. Those options are: Per seat gifts are required for all season tickets in Lane Stadium.
Season tickets for 2023 Virginia Football home games are also currently on sale. Fans have five different price options from which to choose when purchasing 2023 season tickets. Scott Stadium seating sections are designated Prime ($360), Preferred ($290 – lower level, closed endzone), Choice ($220), Select ($165) and Value ($129). 3 Game Mini Plan (On Sale Now!) Pick three games and save money compared to buying single game tickets and secure your seats in advance. Ticket packages starting at $54 ($18 per game). Includes the Following Choices: Pick 1: James Madison (Sept. 9) or William & Mary (Oct. 7) Pick 2: NC State (Fri Sept. 22), Georgia Tech (Nov. 4), or Duke (Nov. 18) For questions regarding football season tickets contact the Virginia Athletics Ticket Office Monday-Friday from 9 a.m. – 5 p.m., by phone (800-542-8821).
This post was contributed by a community member. The views expressed here are the author's own. October is Breast Cancer Awareness month and Wine OFF the Fox on Saturday Oct. 22 features wine tasting and live performances from girl bands at Oswego’s Venue 1012. Plus a portion of the event’s proceeds benefit organizations that provide breast cancer services and support. Select and sip from more than 18 varieties of wine including blush white and red; seasonal craft beer from Oswego Brewing Company; a signature cocktail and non-alcoholic options. Bring your own picnic and relax in the crisp autumn air while you listen to the hottest hits of today and ‘60s ‘70s and ‘80s from girl bands Jersey Girls and Serendipity. Tickets are on sale now! Wine OFF the Fox and Breast Cancer benefit concert – Venue 1012 Wine OFF the Fox takes place on Saturday Oct. 22 from 2 to 7 p.m. at Venue 1012 1012 Station Drive Oswego.
For more information and to purchase tickets visit Wine OFF the Fox and Breast Cancer benefit concert – Venue 1012 Thursday, 5:00 pmOswego, IL Saturday, 9:00 amOswego, IL Saturday, 10:00 amNaperville, IL Saturday, 10:00 amOswego, IL Sunday, 10:00 amNaperville, IL Thursday, 7:00 pmOswego, IL Friday, 5:00 pmOswego, IL
On 8 September 2022, at 15:10 BST, Elizabeth II, Queen of the United Kingdom and the other Commonwealth realms, and the longest-reigning British monarch, died at Balmoral Castle in Aberdeenshire, Scotland, at the age of 96. Her death was publicly announced at 18:30. She was succeeded by her eldest son, Charles III.  The death of Queen Elizabeth II set in motion Operation London Bridge, a collection of plans including arrangements for her state funeral, and supported by Operation Unicorn, which set protocols for her death occurring in Scotland. The United Kingdom observed a national mourning period of 10 days. The Queen's lying in state took place in Westminster Hall from 14 to 19 September, during which time an estimated 250,000 people queued to pay their respects.  Elizabeth's state funeral on 19 September was the first held in Britain since Winston Churchill's in 1965. A funeral service was held at Westminster Abbey, followed by a procession to Wellington Arch that featured around 3,000 military personnel and was watched by around a million people in central London. The state hearse then transported the Queen's coffin to Windsor, followed by another procession through Windsor Great Park and a committal service at St George's Chapel at Windsor Castle.
Britain honored the life of Queen Elizabeth II with a state funeral steeped in tradition on Monday. The Queen, the UK's longest-reigning monarch, died September 8 after a rule spanning seven decades. She was 96. The funeral service took place at Westminster Abbey in London, where the Queen was crowned 69 years ago and where she was married to her husband, Prince Philip, 75 years ago. Presidents, prime ministers, princes, an emperor and an empress were among the dignitaries paying their final respects — a testament to the Queen's far-reaching appeal and deft diplomacy. Thousands of people flocked to the Abbey and streets along the 25-mile (40-kilometer) procession route from central London to Windsor, hoping to catch a glimpse of the Queen's flag-draped coffin as it traveled by hearse to her final resting place in St. George's Chapel, within the grounds of Windsor Castle. © 2023 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.  CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.
On 8 September 2022, at 15:10 BST, Elizabeth II, Queen of the United Kingdom and the other Commonwealth realms, and the longest-reigning British monarch, died at Balmoral Castle in Aberdeenshire, Scotland, at the age of 96. Her death was publicly announced at 18:30. She was succeeded by her eldest son, Charles III.  The death of Queen Elizabeth II set in motion Operation London Bridge, a collection of plans including arrangements for her state funeral, and supported by Operation Unicorn, which set protocols for her death occurring in Scotland. The United Kingdom observed a national mourning period of 10 days. The Queen's lying in state took place in Westminster Hall from 14 to 19 September, during which time an estimated 250,000 people queued to pay their respects.  Elizabeth's state funeral on 19 September was the first held in Britain since Winston Churchill's in 1965. A funeral service was held at Westminster Abbey, followed by a procession to Wellington Arch that featured around 3,000 military personnel and was watched by around a million people in central London. The state hearse then transported the Queen's coffin to Windsor, followed by another procession through Windsor Great Park and a committal service at St George's Chapel at Windsor Castle.
The Queen was interred with her husband, Prince Philip, in the King George VI Memorial Chapel later that evening, in a private service attended only by her closest family.  The state funeral was the largest security operation ever mounted in the UK, and included dignitaries from around the world. The funeral was designated as a public holiday in the UK and several Commonwealth states. The state funeral was one of the United Kingdom's most watched special television broadcasts, surpassing the wedding of Prince William and Catherine Middleton, the previous most watched royal event of the 21st century. The period of official mourning and the funeral was estimated to have cost the government £162 million.[1]  Queen Elizabeth II was in good health for most of her life; her health, however, declined significantly after the death of her husband, Prince Philip, in April 2021.[2] She began to use a walking stick for public engagements in October 2021.[3] On 20 October, the Queen stayed overnight in King Edward VII's Hospital in central London, necessitating the cancellation of scheduled visits to Northern Ireland and the COP26 summit in Glasgow. She suffered a sprained back in November, which prevented her from attending the 2021 National Service of Remembrance.[4][5][6][7]  In February 2022, during the COVID-19 pandemic in England, the Queen was one of several people at Windsor Castle to test positive for COVID-19.
GoldDerby The current 2022 cycle of “America’s Got Talent” will end with a two-night finale on NBC, airing September 13 (performance show) and September 14 (results show). All 11 finalists have now been named, with America picking two per week in each of the five qualifiers rounds, and the 11th being an instant save wildcard. Terry Crews hosts the long-running program, and the judges are Simon Cowell, Sofia Vergara, Heidi Klum and Howie Mandel. Read on for everything to know about the “America’s Got Talent” Season 17 finale. Who are the Top 10 acts of Season 17? America chose two finalists per week from each of the five qualifiers rounds, creating a Top 10. They are: saxophonist Avery Dixon (Terry’s Golden Buzzer), country singer Drake Milligan, country singing trio Chapel Hart (the group’s Golden Buzzer), magician Yu Hojin, pop singer Sara James (Simon’s Golden Buzzer), magician Nicolas RIBS, artificial intelligence act Metaphysic, stand-up comedian Mike E. Winfield, Lebanese dance act Mayyas (Sofia’s Golden Buzzer) and pole dancer/animator Kristy Sellars.            SEE All Golden Buzzers on ‘AGT’ through the years Who is the instant save wildcard?
America’s Got Talent also welcomed back several familiar acts from seasons past, including ventriloquist Terry Fator (Season 2 winner), ventriloquist Dari Lynne (Season 12 winner), dance group Light Balance (Season 12 finalist), dance group Silhouettes (Season 6 finalist), and magician Shin Lim (winner of Season 13 and AGT: The Champions Season 1). With 30 minutes left in the broadcast, the brutal final cuts began. Read on to find out how the Top 5 shook out on Wednesday, then drop a comment with your thoughts on the outcome of Season 17. Did the right act win? This Mississippi vocal trio rounded out AGT‘s Top 5 of Season 17. Terry Crews seemed genuinely disappointed to send this A.I. duo packing in fourth place. In addition to placing third, this Texas-based rocker left with the judges’ respect; they acknowledged that he already scored a No. 1 song and easily could have walked away from the competition. It was close but no cigar for this Australian pole dancer, who placed second. And the highest of congratulations are in order for this dance group from Lebanon. Comments are monitored, so don’t forkin' curse and don’t bore us with how much your coworker’s sister-in-law makes per hour. Talk smart about TV!    Comment *  Name *  Email * Your email address will not be published. We will notify you when someone replies.
MotorCity Casino Hotel welcomes MotorCity Cage Night XII - Live Mixed Martial Arts Fights at Sound Board on Friday, November 18, 2022. Doors open at 6:30pm and the first bout begins at 7pm. Bouts to be officially announced prior to the event. Card subject to change without notice All bouts to be approved by the State of Michigan Unarmed Combat Commission All guests must be at least 21 years of age with valid photo ID. "SOUND BOARD, an intimate live performance venue is located at MotorCity Casino Hotel. The venue features four bars and several private suites that are available to create an unforgettable live entertainment event. Free and convenient valet and self-parking are available." Additional Ticket Information Visit SoundBoardDetroit.com/Packages for more information about VIP Tickets & Hotel Packages.  Get in touch with us at 866-STAY-MCC or info@soundboarddetroit.com. Where can I park? Olympia Development operates 32 parking facilities within The District Detroit. To pre-reserve parking, visit ParkDistrictDetroit.com Parking is included in your ticket price at our amphitheatres and is offered onsite at the venue. Will events be cancelled due to rain, snow, or inclement weather?
Preregistration is required by calling 248-858-0916 for a free spot. • Metroparks Movies in the Parks: Parking opens at 6 p.m., movie starts at dusk. Bring snacks and drinks or picnic dinner. “Spiderman No Way Home” is Sept. 17, at Stony Creek Metropark. Drive-in style movie, free entry with Metroparks daily or annual pass entry to the park. If inclement weather, the event will be canceled, metroparks.com/movies-in-the-parks. • Open caption screenings “The Woman King” (PG-13): Sept. 18 and Sept. 21, Emagine Theatres, Emagine-Entertainment.com. • 5th Annual “Noir City-Detroit”: Sept. 23-25, 8 noir film titles hosted by Eddie Muller, Redford Theatre, 17360 Lahser Road, Detroit, 313-537-2560, RedfordTheatre.com, all-access pass, $40 each. • Auto Show Charity Preview event: 6-11 p.m. Sept. 16, at Huntington Convention Center, Huntington Place, 1 Washington Blvd., Detroit, with black tie attire and entertainment by Nile Rodgers and CHIC, naias.com/charity-preview-tickets, $350+. • JARC Annual Fundraiser: 5-8:45 p.m. Sept.
Several 911 callers reported seeing two planes collide over Boulder County. Three people are confirmed dead after two small aircraft collided mid-air in Colorado Saturday, authorities said. Multiple 911 callers reported seeing two planes collide over Boulder County shortly before 9 a.m. local time, the Boulder County Sheriff's Office said. The aircraft collided and crashed near Vance Brand Airport in Longmont at 8:50 a.m., according to the Federal Aviation Administration. The collision involved a single-engine Cessna 172 and a Sonex Xenos aircraft, a type of motor glider, the National Transportation Safety Board said. First responders found two separate crash sites near Niwot Road, the sheriff's office said. Aerial footage showed that one of the aircraft had landed in trees, while the other crashed into a nearby field. Two people were on board the Cessna 172, the FAA said. The sheriff's office also said it confirmed two people were on board the plane, both of whom were found dead at the scene. The sheriff's office said at this time one person was confirmed to be in the aircraft, who was also found dead at the scene. The FAA said it is unknown how many people were on board the second aircraft. The victims have yet to be identified, the sheriff's office said. Once identified, their names will be released pending next-of-kin notification. The FAA and NTSB are investigating the cause of the crash.
9NEWS Aviation Safety Analyst Greg Feith said that whenever there is a midair collision, there's a multifaceted investigation.  "You have to look again, first and foremost at each aircraft for any kind of mechanical malfunction, failure or anomalies that would cause or contributed to the accident," he said, adding that the other factor includes looking at the avionics of each plane, including the Traffic Collision Avoidance System (TCAS).  "That uses transponder information and the transponder basically pings a signal from the airplane. It's picked up by air traffic control radar so that your plane can be identified by the number, altitude and ground speed. But the technology also lets airplanes communicate among each other. So now the same ping goes off between point or one airplane to the other," Feith explained.  Besides that system, Feith believes this is more of a "see and avoid" type accident.  "That is on a beautiful day like this, it is incumbent upon each pilot flying in the airspace to clear the area visually to ensure that things like this don't happen," he said.  Feith adds that the airspace around where this crash may have happened, is known to have high air traffic, especially since it's known as a "training box." "So you have a lot of airplanes operating in a band of airspace or a box of airspace.
Populist firebrand Giorgia Meloni has been named as Italy’s first female prime minister, becoming the country’s most far-right leader since Benito Mussolini.           She received the mandate to form a government from Italy’s President Sergio Mattarella on Friday afternoon after two days of official consultations, and is set to be sworn in at 10 a.m. local time (4 a.m. ET) on Saturday.           Last month’s general election resulted in an alliance of far-right and center-right parties, led by her ultraconservative Brothers of Italy, winning enough seats in Italy’s parliament to form a government.           Meloni announced her government picks in Rome’s Quirinal Palace, making the leader of Italy’s far right League party, Matteo Salvini, infrastructure minister.            Giancarlo Giorgetti, also of the League party, was made economy minister. Antonio Tajani from the Forza Italia party was given the position of minister of foreign affairs while the role of defense minister went to Guido Crosetto, one of the founders of the Brothers of Italy party.           The new government will be made up of a coalition of Meloni’s Brothers of Italy party, Salvini’s League party and the Forza Italia party, led by former Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi. The Brothers of Italy received nine ministries whereas Forza Italia and the League each received five ministries.
He succeeded in being elected by obtaining 116 votes out of 206 in the first round thanks to the support from opposition parties to the centre-right coalition.[117][118][119] Tensions further grew, in particular between Berlusconi and Meloni, whom Berlusconi described as "patronising, overbearing, arrogant ... [and] offensive" in a series of written notes in the Senate.[120][121] In the following days, after meetings between parties' leader, tensions loosened and the centre-right coalition parties reached an agreement on the formation of the new cabinet.[122]  On 20 October, consultations between President Sergio Mattarella and parties officially began. On the following day, delegates from FdI, the League, FI, and Civics of Italy–Us Moderates–MAIE, announced to Mattarella they had reached an agreement to form a coalition government with Meloni as Prime Minister.[123][124] In the afternoon, Mattarella summoned Meloni to the Quirinal Palace, asking her to form a new government.[125] She accepted the task and on the same day announced the composition of her cabinet, which was officially sworn in on 22 October.[126][127][128] She is the first woman to hold the office of Prime Minister of Italy.[129][130][131]
Last updated on 19 September 202219 September 2022.From the section Wales Wales have called up teenage Birmingham City midfielder Jordan James for their Nations League games against Belgium and Poland on 22 and 25 September after injury ruled out Joe Allen. Uncapped James, 18, has played for England Under-20s and was last week included in the Wales Under-21 squad. Senior Wales boss Robert Page has now promoted James to his squad. While a hamstring strain ruled out Allen, defender Ben Davies' small leg fracture forced his absence. Swansea's Allen and Tottenham's Davies picked up the injuries with their clubs. Davies, 29, is expected to be out for around three weeks after suffering his injury in Spurs' Champions League defeat by Sporting Lisbon. Allen came off in Swansea's 3-0 Championship win over Hull on Saturday. Wales travel to Belgium on Thursday before hosting Poland three days later. Spurs manager Antonio Conte has said Davies will not be available for Wales duty. "He had an injury in his knee in the game against Sporting Lisbon, and he played with this injury," Conte told Sky Sports.  "It is not a serious injury, I think (he will be back) after the international break because, with the national team, he is not available.  "But I think after the international break, he will be available for us." Allen, 32, missed the start of the season with a hamstring problem picked up on Wales duty in June.
Giggs also revealed Dummett could have been in line for a place in his starting line-up against Azerbaijan, had he made himself available for selection. "He just wants to concentrate on club football. I've got to respect that and I have players in that position who are playing so I'm not fussed about that. Giggs says he respects Dummett’s decision (Image: Andrew Dowling Photography) "Obviously he is playing in the Premier League, he's a good defender but I've got options. With captain Ashley Williams and Dummett both absent, a door will open for Swansea defender Joe Rodon who has impressed in the opening three Championship fixtures this season.  While Tottenham defender Ben Davies also looks to have recovered from surgery on his groin in time for the crunch clash.
The 2022 WNBA Finals, officially the WNBA Finals 2022 presented by YouTube TV for sponsorship reasons, was the best-of-five championship series for the 2022 season of the Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA). The finals featured the first-seeded Las Vegas Aces facing off against the third-seeded Connecticut Sun.[1] The Aces defeated the Sun in 4 games, winning their first WNBA Championship. This was Las Vegas's third time making the finals, and the second time since moving to Vegas. They previously competed in the Finals in 2008 and 2020. This was Connecticut's fourth time making the finals. They previously competed in 2004, 2005, and 2019.[2]  The Aces won the finals three games to one to claim their first championship in franchise history.  Head coach Becky Hammon became the first rookie head coach to win the WNBA Title.  In the WNBA's Inaugural Finals, Van Chancellor was a rookie to the WNBA, but had coached in college for nineteen years before winning the WNBA title.[3] Alyssa Thomas recorded the first WNBA Finals triple-double in Game Three.[4] She recorded the second in Finals history in Game Four.[5]  Bold Series winner In November 2021, the WNBA Board of Governors formalized a new playoff system that will structure the 2022 playoffs onward.
The team that executes the best when the game is on the line and the players that can knock down shots when the pressure is at its peak could determine the outcome of this series. THE PICK Chicago in five games. These teams have played one another eight times in the past 11 months and Chicago has gone 7-1 in those games. That is a hard fact to ignore when considering which team will be the first to earn three wins over the next 12 days. Of course, by picking the Sky, I’ve added more disrespect fuel to the Sun’s collective competitive fire. As a team, Connecticut plays with a chip on it shoulder with a desire to quiet doubters on their way to success. They have a prime chance to do so in this series as they look to knock off the defending champs on their way back to the Finals. Longtime WNBA reporter Brian Martin writes articles on WNBA.com throughout the season. The views on this page do not necessarily reflect the views of the WNBA or its clubs.  Atlanta Dream Copyright 2023 NBA Media Ventures, LLC. All rights reserved. No portion of NBA.com may be duplicated, redistributed or manipulated in any form. By accessing any information beyond this page, you agree to abide by the NBA.com If you are having difficulty accessing any content on this website, please visit our Accessibility page.
Create a free profile to get unlimited access to exclusive show news, updates, and more! Let awards season begin!  NBC will be hosting the 80th Annual Golden Globe Awards in 2023. The network has been hosting the award ceremony since 1996, which recognizes the best and brightest in film and television, as selected by the Hollywood Foreign Press Association.  “We recognize the HFPA’s commitment to ongoing change and look forward to welcoming back the Golden Globes to NBC for its landmark 80th anniversary in January 2023,” Frances Berwick, NBCUniversal Television and Streaming’s Chairman of Entertainment Networks, said in a statement.  Here's what to know about the 2023 Golden Globes: Tuesday, January 10, 2023.
Stepping away from the brink of cancellation after two years of tumult, the rebooted Golden Globes ceremony  returns to the small screen Tuesday night.  The show was pushed out of the mainstream awards cycle last year after a Los Angeles Times investigation uncovered questionable self-dealing, ethical lapses and a lack of diversity among members of its parent organization, the Hollywood Foreign Press Assn.   Awards  Winners of the 2023 Golden Globes include “House of the Dragon,” “Fabelmans,” “Abbott Elementary” and “The Banshees of Inisherin.”   The 80th Golden Globe Awards — which honors projects across film and television  and typically kicks off the awards season — will air at 5 p.m. Pacific Tuesday on NBC and will be streamed on the network’s premium Peacock service. The show will take place at its usual haunt, the Beverly Hilton in Beverly Hills.  In September, NBC and the HFPA announced the Globes’ return to its longtime broadcast television home in time for the awards show’s 80th anniversary.   Entertainment & Arts  Every year people complain about the awards show surplus. We finally got rid of the most absurd and corrupt of them — and now the Globes are back? Why?    NBC dropped the 2022 Globes broadcast  after a contingent of powerful publicists boycotted the organization and some studios — including Netflix and WarnerMedia — cut ties after The Times’ investigation.
The Pixel Watch is a Wear OS smartwatch designed, developed, and marketed by Google as part of the Google Pixel product line. First previewed in May 2022 during the Google I/O keynote, it features a round dome-shaped display as well as heavy integration with Fitbit, which Google acquired in 2021. Two Pixel-branded smartwatches had been in development at Google by July 2016, but they were canceled ahead of their release due to hardware chief Rick Osterloh's concerns that they did not fit well with other Pixel devices. Development on a new Pixel-branded watch began shortly after Google's acquisition of Fitbit.  The Pixel Watch was officially announced on October 6, 2022, at the annual Made by Google event, and was released in the United States on October 13.  In July 2016, Google was reportedly developing two smartwatches, codenamed "Swordfish" and "Angelfish", which were to be powered by the Android Wear operating system and expected to be released under the Nexus brand name.[2] According to Business Insider, these watches were canceled ahead of the 2016 Made by Google launch event due to concerns from Google hardware chief Rick Osterloh that they did not sync well with the company's new Pixel devices; the smartwatches were eventually "salvaged" by LG and released as the LG Watch Style and LG Watch Sport in February 2017.
17][18] Two months later, Business Insider reported that a Pixel-branded smartwatch codenamed "Rohan" was being targeted for a 2022 release, featuring a round bezel-less design, integration with Fitbit, proprietary watch bands, and health-tracking capabilities.[19][20] Evidence unearthed that month indicated that the watch would be powered by either Samsung's Exynos system-on-chip (SoC) or Google's own Tensor chip, the latter of which had recently debuted on the company's Pixel 6 smartphone line.[21] In April 2022, the "Fitbit" category was renamed "Watches" on the online Google Store, in anticipation of the Pixel Watch's impending launch.[22] The same month, Google filed a trademark for the "Pixel Watch" name with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office,[23] while three models of the smartwatch were approved by the Bluetooth Special Interest Group.[24] A prototype of the Pixel Watch was found at a restaurant in the U.S., an incident which drew comparisons to Gizmodo's leak of Apple's iPhone 4 in 2010.[25][26]  Osterloh unveiled a preview of the Pixel Watch on May 11, during the 2022 Google I/O keynote.
Javascript must be enabled for the correct page display Academics Resources Quick Links Center for Sports Media On September 15, Seton Hall's Center for Sports Media hosted a gala at The Lighthouse                                                                                        at Chelsea Piers, NYC, celebrating its Executive Founder, Bob Ley '76, and honoring                                                                                        media icon Robin Roberts with a Lifetime Professional Achievement Award.  VIEW ALL NEWS AND EVENTS VIEW ALL NEWS AND EVENTS VIEW ALL NEWS AND EVENTS   Seton Hall’s Center for Sports Media recognizes Robin Roberts as an outstanding leader                                                                in sports media, making strides for equity and influence in the next generation of                                                                sports journalism. Thank you to our guests, patrons and sponsors! Because of your generosity, the event raised $380,000 to help us train the next generation of sports media professionals. Your support will advance the field by providing innovative training, state-of-the-art                                                                resources, and hands-on experiences to the next generation of sports media professionals. Please consider supporting the Center for Sports Media by making a donation today. Bob Ley '76Executive FounderSeton Hall University Center for Sports Media George BodenheimerFormer PresidentESPN Chris McKendryTennis HostESPN Jane McManusExecutive Director, Center for Sports Media Seton Hall University Kevin NegandhiSportsCenter AnchorESPN Jim O'Brien '82Sr.
Managing Partner and CEONapier Park Global Capital Jon Paparsenos '99Vice President for University AdvancementSeton Hall University Renee Robinson, Ph.D.Vice Dean, College of Communication and the ArtsSeton Hall University Bardia Shah-Rais '95VP of ProductionFox Sports Leo Zatta '78ChairmanTeam Walker, Inc. Chris Berman(Honorary Member)NFL Studio HostESPN Larry GanimFounderGanim Financial Don Garber(Honorary Member)CommissionerMajor League Soccer Jay HarrisSportsCenter AnchorESPN Jimmy Pitaro(Honorary Member)PresidentESPN Carlton Hill Foundation George and Ann BodenheimerBob Ley '76Leo Zatta '78 ESPNGanim FinancialChris McKendry and Eduardo Andrade  If you have questions about the Center for Sports Media and opportunities for investment,                                                                                  I’d love to hear from you. Brian RuarkAssociate Vice President for Development[email protected](973) 378-2620 Learn more about the Center for Sports Media and the academic programs available at Seton Hall University in the field of Sports                                                          Media.
Ditto Carol Channing (twice) or any one of those four annoyingly contrived Up With People performances in the late '70s and early '80s. The Super Bowl halftime show, before Michael Jackson, was an endless wasteland of college marching bands and maddening flag-spinning tributes, from salutes to Hollywood (twice), to Motown, to the Big Band Era, to the Caribbean, to Duke Ellington. We also got the New Kids on the Block (1991) not singing any of their biggest hits and Gloria Estefan (1992) providing the soundtrack for Olympic figure skaters Dorothy Hamill and Brian Boitano of "What would Brian Boitano do?" fame, because nothing says a Minnesota Super Bowl like the lead singer of the Miami Sound Machine. Then we got the King of Pop at the Rose Bowl in 1993 -- and the Super Bowl halftime show was never the same again. Here is the complete list of previous Super Bowl halftime performers and themes: 2023: Rihanna 2022: Eminem, Dr. Dre. Snoop Dogg, Kendrick Lamar and Mary J.
Sports rights have long been the province of traditional media companies like Fox, Disney, Paramount Global and NBCUniversal, but technology companies like Apple and Amazon have made a bigger play for those rights as they seek to bring in consumers to their broadband subscription-video services. Amazon, for its part, is now a major NFL partner thanks to its control of rights to “Thursday Night Football.”  	Earlier this year, the Super Bowl LVI Halftime Show assembled a star-studded crew of artists including Dr. Dre, Snoop Dogg, Eminem, Mary J. Blige and Kendrick Lamar. The performance achieved five Creative Arts Emmy nominations and won three Creative Arts Emmys, including outstanding live variety special — a first-ever for the Halftime show.  	Past Super Bowl Halftime Show performances include the Weeknd, Jennifer Lopez, Shakira, Justin Timberlake, Lady Gaga, Katy Perry, Bruno Mars, Prince, Madonna and more.  	Apple Music will be offering sneak peeks of its Halftime ideas via its social handle on TikTok, Instagram and Twitter.
Shinzo Abe, the former prime minister of Japan and a serving member of the House of Representatives, was assassinated on 8 July 2022 while speaking at a political event outside Yamato-Saidaiji Station in Nara City, Nara Prefecture, Japan.[3][4][5] While delivering a campaign speech for a Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) candidate, he was shot from behind at close range by a man with an improvised firearm.[1] Abe was transported by a medical helicopter to Nara Medical University Hospital in Kashihara, where he was pronounced dead.[6]  Leaders from many nations expressed shock and dismay at Abe's assassination,[7] which was the first of a former Japanese prime minister since Saitō Makoto and Takahashi Korekiyo during the February 26 incident in 1936.[8] Prime Minister Kishida decided to hold a state funeral for Abe on 27 September.[9]  The suspect, 41-year-old Tetsuya Yamagami (Japanese: 山上 徹也), was arrested at the scene for attempted murder; the charge was later upgraded to murder after Abe was pronounced dead. Yamagami told investigators that he had shot Abe in relation to a grudge he held against the Unification Church (UC), to which Abe and his family had political ties, over his mother's bankruptcy in 2002.
Kyodo News via AP)                                             TOKYO (AP) — Former Prime Minister Shinzo Abe was assassinated Friday on a street in western Japan by a gunman who opened fire on him from behind as he delivered a campaign speech — an attack that stunned a nation with some of the strictest gun control laws anywhere. The 67-year-old Abe, who was Japan’s longest-serving leader when he resigned in 2020, collapsed bleeding and was airlifted to a nearby hospital in Nara, although he was not breathing and his heart had stopped. He was later pronounced dead after receiving massive blood transfusions, officials said. A hearse carrying Abe’s body left the hospital early Saturday to head back to his home in Tokyo. Abe’s wife Akie lowered her head as the vehicle passed before a crowd of journalists. Nara Medical University emergency department chief Hidetada Fukushima said Abe suffered major damage to his heart, along with two neck wounds that damaged an artery. He never regained his vital signs, Fukushima said. Police at the shooting scene arrested Tetsuya Yamagami, 41, a former member of Japan’s navy, on suspicion of murder. Police said he used a gun that was obviously homemade — about 15 inches (40 centimeters) long — and they confiscated similar weapons and his personal computer when they raided his nearby one-room apartment.
Shinzo Abe, the former prime minister of Japan and a serving member of the House of Representatives, was assassinated on 8 July 2022 while speaking at a political event outside Yamato-Saidaiji Station in Nara City, Nara Prefecture, Japan.[3][4][5] While delivering a campaign speech for a Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) candidate, he was shot from behind at close range by a man with an improvised firearm.[1] Abe was transported by a medical helicopter to Nara Medical University Hospital in Kashihara, where he was pronounced dead.[6]  Leaders from many nations expressed shock and dismay at Abe's assassination,[7] which was the first of a former Japanese prime minister since Saitō Makoto and Takahashi Korekiyo during the February 26 incident in 1936.[8] Prime Minister Kishida decided to hold a state funeral for Abe on 27 September.[9]  The suspect, 41-year-old Tetsuya Yamagami (Japanese: 山上 徹也), was arrested at the scene for attempted murder; the charge was later upgraded to murder after Abe was pronounced dead. Yamagami told investigators that he had shot Abe in relation to a grudge he held against the Unification Church (UC), to which Abe and his family had political ties, over his mother's bankruptcy in 2002.
Japanese Prime Minister Fumio Kishida paid his “deepest condolences” to former leader Abe, saying he “was a personal friend, with whom (he) spent a lot of time.”           Kishida said he had a “great respect for the legacy (Abe) left behind” and would continue election campaigning on Saturday, adding a free and fair election must be defended at all costs.           News of the shooting and Abe’s subsequent death horrified leaders around the world, many of whom had worked with Abe during his long tenure.           US President Joe Biden said he was “stunned, outraged, and deeply saddened,” adding he had worked closely with Abe and his killing was “a tragedy for Japan and all who knew him.”            “While there are many details that we do not yet know, we know that violent attacks are never acceptable and that gun violence always leaves a deep scar on the communities that are affected by it. The United States stands with Japan in this moment of grief,” the US president said in a statement.            Later on Friday, Biden ordered American flags at the White House and on other federal grounds be flown at half-staff until Sunday in recognition of Abe’s death.      Who was former Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe?
The state funeral of Shinzo Abe, former prime minister of Japan and serving member of the House of Representatives who was assassinated on 8 July 2022, was attended by roughly 3,600 people within Japan alone and by around 700 international attendees.[1] The funeral was held on 27 September 2022 at the Nippon Budokan venue in Chiyoda, Tokyo. Out of the foreign attendees, 49 top-level foreign leaders and 218 foreign delegates, including 101 ambassadors and representatives based in Japan, were present at the state funeral.[2]
Anthony Kuhn                        A portrait of Japan's former prime minister Shinzo Abe hangs above the stage during his state funeral in the Nippon Budokan Hall in Tokyo on Tuesday.                                                           Takashi Aoyama/Pool/AFP via Getty Images                                       hide caption  A portrait of Japan's former prime minister Shinzo Abe hangs above the stage during his state funeral in the Nippon Budokan Hall in Tokyo on Tuesday. TOKYO — Japan held a rare state funeral for its longest-serving prime minister, Shinzo Abe, on Tuesday, despite widespread public opposition to the event. Roads were closed around the Nippon Budokan Hall, where the event was held. Some 20,000 police were mobilized to prevent the sort of security lapses which allowed Abe's suspected killer to walk behind him at a July 8 campaign event and shoot him twice with a homemade shotgun. The government estimates that 23,000 mourners lined up to lay flowers at tables in front of pictures of Abe outside the hall. In a sign of the divisions surrounding the commemoration, thousands of others took to the streets in protest. Just down the street from the Budokan, protesters opposed to the state funeral tussled with Abe supporters and police.  Critics objected to the use of $11.
Den of Geek    Ad New actors, new dragons, and new drama keep House of the Dragon fresh after a 10-year time jump. This House of the Dragon review contains spoilers. “The Princess and the Queen” is effectively a second pilot episode for House of the Dragon. The installment flashes further forward into the future than ever before and ages its characters up so severely that they may as well be entirely different people. And that’s not even to mention the nearly dozen actually new characters that the episode does introduce in the form of Queen Alicent, Princess Rhaenyra, and Prince Daemon’s respective broods of children.  The decision to jump so far down the timeline midseason is as bold a one as you’re likely to see on television. It has every reason to be a disastrous one as well. Shuffling the board to this extent halfway through a story shouldn’t work. And yet, work “The Princess and The Queen” does. This episode isn’t just an impressive technical maneuver. It’s by far the most entertaining and enriching dispatch from House of the Dragon yet.  The fresh burst of energy that “The Princess and The Queen” provides to House of the Dragon is evident from its very first scene.
House of the Dragon. Photograph by Ollie Upton / HBO We’ve rounded the halfway point on House of the Dragon season 1, HBO’s much-hyped Game of Thrones prequel series. House of the Dragon will feature a large time jump between Episodes 5 and 6; when the dust settles, a bunch of major characters will be played by different actors, and the realm will be a very different place. The floodgates are beginning to open and we are finding out more and more about the last five episodes of season 1. HBO now has Episodes 6-10 listed on their official schedule, complete with runtimes. In addition, Rotten Tomatoes‘ series page for the show has episode titles listed. We’re going to lay it all out below, with the slight caveat that since the Rotten Tomatoes episode titles have not been officially confirmed by HBO, they must be taken with a grain of salt. The only episode title HBO has confirmed is for Episode 6. While the episode titles aren’t confirmed by HBO, it’s still enough to get us pretty excited. “The Lord of the Tides” refers to the head of House Velaryon; why will that be so relevant during the longest episode of the season? Then there’s “The Green Council.
The acquisition of Times Square Grand Slam was done in continued partnership with Marbella Interests, the Austin-based family office of Bryan Sheffield. In a statement to KLTV, EVO Entertainment Group said, “We are focused on learning and continuing to build upon the reputation and legacy of Times Square Grand Slam and will assess the timing for rebranding to EVO Entertainment in the future.” Copyright 2022 KLTV. All rights reserved.
With its seven theater screens, more than 70 state-of-the-art arcade games, 22 bowling alleys, bi-level laser tag arena, virtual reality entertainment, all-ages ropes course, full restaurants, and VIP bar access, Times Square Grand Slam has long been a draw for Tyler residents. Its role in family connection, as both a place of play and of familial pride, is deeply significant to EVO’s Founder and CEO Mitch Roberts who is a fourth-generation cinema owner.
After proudly declaring himself a “Derry Girl” and bringing everyone to tears (it’s OK if you cried too), he decided to remain in Derry with his friends. Good news for everyone, because the trailer picks up right where we last left them. If their past mishaps tell us anything about the final season, it’s that no one’s going without an emotional and hilarious bang.  Derry Girls Season 3 starts streaming Oct. 7. Check out some photos below. Clare Devlin (Nicola Coughlan) is having a plaid moment.
By  													 														Alex Fletcher   Updated: 4 May 2022, 10.54am | 6 min read  By Press Association Updated: 4 May 2022, 10.54am | 6 min read  Derry Girls is the ultimate comedy for children of the 90s. With its razor-sharp script, schooldays nostalgia and genius characters, it’s certainly a series to binge. After the first two seasons were a huge success, find out everything we know so far about the show's return in 2022 for season 3, including the release date, cast, trailer and more. Watch the latest shows and sport from Sky with a NOW Membership, Netflix, and Discovery+ all in one place. Derry Girls season 3 starts on Tuesday, April 12th, 2022 on Channel 4. Catch up on All 4. New episodes are released weekly. Season 3 releases new episodes every Tuesday at 9.15pm on Channel 4. The final season will have six episodes. The Derry Girls season 3 finale will air on Tuesday 17 May at 9.15pm on Channel 4. It's been confirmed that a special one-off episode will will air in the same week as the finale, although Channel 4 hasn't announced a specific release date for it yet.
The Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine has been awarded 113 times to 225 Nobel Prize laureates between 1901 and 2022. Click on the links to get more information. The Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 2023 has not been awarded yet. It will be announced on Monday 2 October, 11:30 CEST at the earliest. Svante Pääbo “for his discoveries concerning the genomes of extinct hominins and human evolution”. David Julius and Ardem Patapoutian “for their discoveries of receptors for temperature and touch”. Harvey J. Alter, Michael Houghton and Charles M. Rice “for the discovery of Hepatitis C virus”. William G. Kaelin Jr, Sir Peter J. Ratcliffe and Gregg L. Semenza “for their discoveries of how cells sense and adapt to oxygen availability” James P. Allison and Tasuku Honjo “for their discovery of cancer therapy by inhibition of negative immune regulation” Jeffrey C. Hall, Michael Rosbash and Michael W. Young “for their discoveries of molecular mechanisms controlling the circadian rhythm” Yoshinori Ohsumi “for his discoveries of mechanisms for autophagy” William C. Campbell and Satoshi Ōmura “for their discoveries concerning a novel therapy against infections caused by roundworm parasites” Tu Youyou “for her discoveries concerning a novel therapy against Malaria” John O’Keefe, May-Britt Moser and Edvard I.
9] The following medical experts were the members of the 2022 Nobel Committee:   The following publications were the fundamental researches that motivated the Nobel Assembly at Karolinska Institutet to award the 2022 Prize to Pääbo:[10]
The 2022 Nobel Prize in literature was awarded to French author Annie Ernaux, for “the courage and clinical acuity with which she uncovers the roots, estrangements and collective restraints of personal memory,” the Nobel committee said. (Henrik Montgomery/TT News Agency via AP) Permanent Secretary of the Swedish Academy Mats Malm announces the 2022 Nobel Prize in Literature, in Borshuset, Stockholm, Sweden, Thursday, Oct. 6, 2022. The 2022 Nobel Prize in literature was awarded to French author Annie Ernaux, for “the courage and clinical acuity with which she uncovers the roots, estrangements and collective restraints of personal memory,” the Nobel committee said. (Henrik Montgomery/TT News Agency via AP) French author Annie Ernaux, left, and Chairman of French publishing house Gallimard, Antoine Gallimard, right, at the end of a press conference after Ernaux was awarded 2022’s Nobel Prize in literature, in Paris, Thursday, Oct. 6, 2022. The 82-year-old was cited for “the courage and clinical acuity with which she uncovers the roots, estrangements and collective restraints of personal memory,” the Nobel committee said.
Ill. Niklas Elmehed © Nobel Prize Outreach  Prize share: 1/1   To cite this section  MLA style: The Nobel Prize in Literature 2022. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2023. Tue. 8 Aug 2023. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/literature/2022/summary/>  Tasked with a mission to manage Alfred Nobel's fortune and has ultimate responsibility for fulfilling the intentions of Nobel's will. For more than a century, these academic institutions have worked independently to select Nobel Prize laureates. Several outreach organisations and activities have been developed to inspire generations and disseminate knowledge about the Nobel Prize.
New York, NY and Los Angeles, CA – October 6, 2022 – Lachlan Murdoch, Executive Chair and Chief Executive Officer of Fox Corporation (Nasdaq: FOXA, FOX), today announced that Rob Wade has been appointed Chief Executive Officer of FOX Entertainment, effective immediately. Wade most recently served as President, Alternative Entertainment and Specials of FOX Entertainment. In this role, Wade and his team will guide one of the world’s most recognizable media brands and content producers with FOX broadcast network as its centerpiece. FOX Entertainment includes an expanding portfolio of owned content studios, including award-winning animation house Bento Box Entertainment, TMZ, MarVista Entertainment and Studio Ramsay Global. FOX Entertainment also includes the in-house unscripted studio FOX Alternative Entertainment, scripted content creator FOX Entertainment Studios, Blockchain Creative Labs, and the worldwide content sales unit FOX Entertainment Global. “Since the formation of FOX Entertainment, Rob has been an integral part of the leadership team responsible for delivering on its long-term strategy of creating an independent media company built on broadcast, developing an owned content portfolio and maintaining a disciplined in-house infrastructure,” said Murdoch. “Given Rob’s sharp creative instincts and proven operational acumen, he is well-suited to lead FOX Entertainment in what promises to be an exciting next chapter in its rich history.
Taylor, who oversees the Company’s legal function, assumed his current role in March 2021. Earlier, Mr. Taylor oversaw litigation, labor and employment, content protection and compliance for all of FOX’s operations, including the FOX Network, FOX Sports, FS1, FS2, FOX Deportes, FOX News Channel, FOX… Brian Nick serves as Chief Communications Officer and Executive Vice President of Fox Corporation.  In this role, he acts as the Company’s chief spokesperson and leads all communications initiatives. Mr. Nick has spent his 20-year career in communications and public affairs, most recently serving as head of communications for Coca-Cola Consolidated, where he led all… Gabrielle Brown serves as Chief Investor Relations Officer and Executive Vice President for Fox Corporation, leading the development and execution of the Company’s investor relations program. Ms. Brown joined FOX from UBS, where she most recently served as a Managing Director specializing in the global internet and media industries. Ms. Brown previously served as a… © Fox 2023. All Rights Reserved.
See Japanese Grand Prix picks at SportsLineMax Verstappen -190Charles Leclerc 15-4Lewis Hamilton 10-1Sergio Perez 11-1George Russell 14-1Carlos Sainz 18-1Lando Norris 150-1Fernando Alonso 200-1Daniel Ricciardo 400-1Esteban Ocon 400-1Pierre Gasly 500-1Sebastian Vettel 750-1Lance Stroll 750-1Yuki Tsunoda 1000-1Valtteri Bottas 1500-1Kevin Magnussen 1500-1Mick Schumacher 2000-1Alexander Albon 2000-1Guanyu Zhou 2000-1Nicholas Latifi 2500-1 © 2004-2023 CBS Interactive. All Rights Reserved. CBS Sports is a registered trademark of CBS Broadcasting Inc. Commissioner.com is a registered trademark of CBS Interactive Inc.
With Red Bull finally reestablishing itself as the dominant force in Formula One, Perez has had the benefit of racing in superior equipment all season and he's managed to turn that into the first two victories of his F1 career. However, he's struggled in Japan since joining Formula 1 in 2011. Perez has made nine career starts in the Japanese Grand Prix and he's never finished better than seventh. And despite his win in Singapore last week, he's failed to reach the podium in six of his last nine starts. He's third in the F1 standings and is only two points behind Leclerc for second but the model predicts that he fails to hit the podium again on Sunday. See who the model is backing right here. The model is also targeting one double-digit longshot to make a surprising surge up the leaderboard. Anyone who backs him could hit it big. You can find out who he is, and see all of the model's F1 picks and predictions at SportsLine. So who wins the Japan Grand Prix 2022? And which under-the-radar drivers makes a charge towards the front? Check out the latest 2022 F1 odds below, then visit SportsLine now to see the full projected 2022 Japanese Grand Prix leaderboard, all from the model with a proven history of auto racing success, and find out.
In the upcoming Dwayne Johnson flick, Black Adam, the character of Adrianna Tomaz is played by actress Sarah Shahi. Tomaz, aka Isis, was a refugee Black Adam received as a bribe from Intergang. Tomaz plays a pivotal role in Black Adam's evolution as a character. Sarah Shahi is a noted actress who's appeared in several popular TV shows and films over the years.  Instagram Post Sarah Shahi was born on January 10, 1980, to Abbas Jahansouzshahi and Mahmonir Soroushazar. Shahi has Iranian ancestry from her paternal and maternal sides. While her father and paternal grandfather are Iranian, her maternal grandmother is Spanish. Shahi was born Aahoo Jahansouzshahi but later changed her name to Sarah Shahi. As a child, Shahi was interested in sports and participated in beauty pageants. She majored in English and Theater at the Southern Methodist University in New Mexico. Sarah Shahi met legendary American director Robert Altman early in her career and worked on his film, Dr. T & the Women. She subsequently went on to star in Dawson's Creek, Supernatural, Alias, and The L Word. In 2007, she played a minor role in HBO's iconic gangster series, The Sopranos. That same year, she landed her first lead role on television in Facing Kate, aka Fairly Legal.
Related: Black Adam: Every DC Character Confirmed To Appear On social media, Shahi posted she was finally starting work on Black Adam, having first been cast a year ago. She shared her appreciation at getting the chance to play this role, and even revealed the name of her character. "Very proud to represent my fellow middle eastern brothers and sisters as Adrianna," Shahi wrote. DC fans will recognize the name Adrianna and associate it with Adrianna Tomaz, Black Adam's wife and the hero Isis. You can see Shahi's full post down below. Adrianna has long been rumored to be a part of Black Adam, so it isn't too surprising that Shahi is actually playing her. However, her role as Adrianna seemingly also confirms the film will feature Isis. In the comics, Adrianna possess the Amulet of Isis, which bestows her with the powers of the goddess. It would make sense for Black Adam to show Adrianna in her superpowered form, perhaps suiting up alongside her husband for an epic battle. Of course, there are bound to be some changes in how Black Adam depicts Adrianna. For one thing, superhero movies these days are always putting some new spins on characters. For another, Shahi's initial casting described her character as "a university professor and freedom fighter leading the resistance in Kahndaq.
Raymond Lee, who will appear in Top Gun: Maverick, is cast in the lead role of Ben Seong in NBC's highly-anticipated Quantum Leap reboot pilot. The Quantum Leap reboot series will star Top Gun: Maverick actor Raymond Lee in the lead role. The cult science-fiction TV show Quantum Leap was a television staple in the late '80s and '90s. Starring Scott Bakula as Dr. Sam Beckett, a scientist who inadvertently leaps through spacetime during time travel experiments, the show became a huge success and ran for five seasons and 97 episodes on NBC. The show was hugely influential, blending the genres of sci-fi, romance, drama, and social commentary, and remains one of the most influential TV shows ever. Following rumors of a possible remake or continuation, NBC greenlit an hour-long pilot, also called Quantum Leap, in January 2022. According to Deadline, Lee, who has previously appeared in episodes of Modern Family and How I Met Your Mother, will play the lead role of Dr. Ben Seong, a world-famous physicist working on a time travel project known as Quantum Leap. The character is said to be a spiritual successor to Beckett, who has been missing for 30 years, and Seong finds himself trapped in the 1980s after he uses the technology on himself.
Martin Gero, Deborah Pratt, and Quantum Leap creator Don Bellisario are also executive producing the revival. The Quantum Leap revival will at least have a pilot episode before NBC makes decision about whether to order a new series. Are you looking forward to seeing Lee in the new Quantum Leap? Let us know in the comment section below! Recommended Reading: The Complete Quantum Leap Book We are a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program. This affiliate advertising program also provides a means to earn fees by linking to Amazon.com and affiliated sites.
The RTX 4090 is available at most major retailers in the US, but you shouldn’t expect a cheap price anywhere, as no matter what card you choose, you’ll be paying at least $1599. On the higher-end of the AIB cards, especially the ASUS ROG Strix OC’d model, you could pay up to around $2000 in total. Though, some of these premium cards can now be found at a slight discount, if you are lucky.  If you’re looking for an RTX 4090 prebuilt PC, retailer B&H has already equipped itself with all manner of configurations for you to purchase. However, expect to spend around $4000 on a brand-new PC of this caliber, as the rest of the parts will also be fairly high-end.  The RTX 4090 is priced at an MSRP of $1599. However, in current listings, you should expect this number to vary from $1599, all the way to around $2000 for the higher-end AIB models from brands such as ASUS. However, months after launch, prices for board partner GPUs are beginning to ease toward MSRP. Despite this, it’s still priced lower than we initially expected, as a Vietnamese retailer listed the new GPU for over $2000. However, it’s thankfully lower.
Both RTX 4080 configurations will be available in November, with prices starting at $1,199 and $899, respectively.  Where to Buy The GeForce RTX 4090 and 4080 GPUs will be available as custom boards, including stock-clocked and factory-overclocked models, from top add-in card providers such as ASUS, Colorful, Gainward, Galaxy, GIGABYTE, Inno3D, MSI, Palit, PNY and Zotac. The RTX 4090 and RTX 4080 (16GB) are also produced directly by NVIDIA in limited Founders Editions for fans wanting the NVIDIA in-house design. Look for the GeForce RTX 40 Series GPUs in gaming systems built by Acer, Alienware, ASUS, Dell, HP, Lenovo and MSI, leading system builders worldwide, and many more. About NVIDIA Since its founding in 1993, NVIDIA (NASDAQ: NVDA) has been a pioneer in accelerated computing. The company’s invention of the GPU in 1999 sparked the growth of the PC gaming market, redefined computer graphics and ignited the era of modern AI. NVIDIA is now a full-stack computing company with data-center-scale offerings that are reshaping industry. More information at https://nvidianews.nvidia.com/.
When New York Knicks executive Ned Irish and Knicks coach Joe Lapchick decide it is time for the Knicks to integrate, with the support of NBA President Maurice Podoloff, they come together with the other team owners of the league to make history." With Clifton as the subject, the film is likely to not just tackle his story, but themes of discrimination and a struggle for acceptance, with the decision to focus on this period of his life an apt one. So, with all that in mind, here is exactly how you can watch Sweetwater when it finally arrives on our screens. Related:10 Best Sports Movies For People Who Don't Like Sports Movies After an immensely long production period, with the film first set as "in production" back in 2012, the release date of this film will feel like the culmination of a saga. Recently, it was announced that Briarcliff Entertainment would release the film nationwide in theaters on April 14, 2023. So, after so long, anyone who has been following this movie's progress can finally book their tickets. Currently, there is no announced streaming release for Sweetwater, however, with sports biopics all the rage, and with Netflix in particular really getting into the genre, it is likely that, soon, the film will end up available to stream somewhere before long.
Of course, as well as this, there is likely to be a DVD release of the movie, which is also worth keeping an eye out for. Yes, there is a trailer for Sweetwater, and it can be watched below: The themes of the film are striking throughout the trailer, with the opening line "It ain't about the color of my skin" resonating instantly. The dramatic score and intense dialogue set up a feeling of triumph through adversity, and it looks as if Sweetwater may just be one of the most feel-good movies hitting theaters this Spring. Every good biopic has a strong and often inspiring central character, and Sweetwater is no different. Born in Arkansas in October 1922, Nat Clifton, nicknamed "Sweetwater" because of his love for fizzy drinks, showed his true talent for basketball throughout his time in school. After serving in the US Army during World War II, Clifton made it back safely and began his career in professional basketball. As a member of the famous Harlem Globetrotters, Clifton would cement his legacy as an all-time great when he became only the second African-American to sign an NBA contract, just four days after Earl Lloyd. In 2014, some 24 years after his death, Clifton was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame, perfectly summarizing his incredible career.
The Pixel Watch is a Wear OS smartwatch designed, developed, and marketed by Google as part of the Google Pixel product line. First previewed in May 2022 during the Google I/O keynote, it features a round dome-shaped display as well as heavy integration with Fitbit, which Google acquired in 2021. Two Pixel-branded smartwatches had been in development at Google by July 2016, but they were canceled ahead of their release due to hardware chief Rick Osterloh's concerns that they did not fit well with other Pixel devices. Development on a new Pixel-branded watch began shortly after Google's acquisition of Fitbit.  The Pixel Watch was officially announced on October 6, 2022, at the annual Made by Google event, and was released in the United States on October 13.  In July 2016, Google was reportedly developing two smartwatches, codenamed "Swordfish" and "Angelfish", which were to be powered by the Android Wear operating system and expected to be released under the Nexus brand name.[2] According to Business Insider, these watches were canceled ahead of the 2016 Made by Google launch event due to concerns from Google hardware chief Rick Osterloh that they did not sync well with the company's new Pixel devices; the smartwatches were eventually "salvaged" by LG and released as the LG Watch Style and LG Watch Sport in February 2017.
17][18] Two months later, Business Insider reported that a Pixel-branded smartwatch codenamed "Rohan" was being targeted for a 2022 release, featuring a round bezel-less design, integration with Fitbit, proprietary watch bands, and health-tracking capabilities.[19][20] Evidence unearthed that month indicated that the watch would be powered by either Samsung's Exynos system-on-chip (SoC) or Google's own Tensor chip, the latter of which had recently debuted on the company's Pixel 6 smartphone line.[21] In April 2022, the "Fitbit" category was renamed "Watches" on the online Google Store, in anticipation of the Pixel Watch's impending launch.[22] The same month, Google filed a trademark for the "Pixel Watch" name with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office,[23] while three models of the smartwatch were approved by the Bluetooth Special Interest Group.[24] A prototype of the Pixel Watch was found at a restaurant in the U.S., an incident which drew comparisons to Gizmodo's leak of Apple's iPhone 4 in 2010.[25][26]  Osterloh unveiled a preview of the Pixel Watch on May 11, during the 2022 Google I/O keynote.
Washington, DC (October 12, 2022)—The Elizabeth Dole Foundation announced Savannah Guthrie, co-anchor of TODAY at NBC News, as the 2022 Tom Hanks Caregiver Champion Award recipient in recognition of her outstanding support of military caregivers. The award will be presented at the Foundation’s annual Heroes & History Makers celebration, on October 19 at The Anthem in Washington, DC and streamed live. The event is the Foundation’s annual tribute to America’s 5.5 million military caregivers, the loved ones who voluntarily care for wounded, ill, and injured service members and veterans at home. Senator Elizabeth Dole will be joined by Hidden Heroes Campaign Chair Tom Hanks and multi-platinum, global entertainer Chris Young. The Caregiver Champion Award was named for Tom Hanks in recognition of his outstanding support of military caregivers. The award has previously been presented to former First Lady Michelle Obama; music superstar Tim McGraw; and actor and humanitarian Gary Sinise. Guthrie was selected in recognition of her devoted advocacy of those who serve and their families. Since joining the Foundation as a Hidden Heroes Ambassador in 2018, Guthrie has used her national platform to bring awareness to the 5.5 million loved ones caring for a wounded, ill, or injured service member at home. “We are thrilled to honor our champion, Savannah, during our 10th anniversary celebration,” said Steve Schwab, CEO of the Elizabeth Dole Foundation.
Hollywood   by senior contributor Brendan Kownacki “If there is a best way in order to combat [that] trauma and that ongoing desperation, it is community,” said actor and advocate Tom Hanks about the challenges felt by military caregivers and family members as they help their loved ones with both big tasks and small tasks alike, facing the new reality of being service disabled. “It is being a part of something bigger than one’s self. And Hidden Heroes started doing it 10 years ago, and it is the key operative motor.”  Tom Hanks Hanks is best known as an actor and director, creating feel-good masterpieces like Big, Toy Story, and That Thing You Do, but also for creating historical epics that chart the stories of our men and women at war, like Saving Private Ryan or the HBO series “Band of Brothers.” Maybe this fascination with the Greatest Generation is what led to his work with the Elizabeth Dole Foundation and supporting military caregivers as the chair of the Hidden Heroes Campaign. Hanks has been candid in saying that it’s way more simple, when Elizabeth Dole asks for your help, you don’t say no.  Senator Elizabeth Dole “You can never fail when you follow the example of Elizabeth Dole” said Steve Schwab, CEO of the foundation, summing up the resolve of the former Senator, Executive, and Cabinet Secretary who has left such an indelible mark on the United States.
On February 4, Mayor Eric Adams announced that Prospect Park… October 17, 2022 Prospect Park Alliance and NYC Parks announced today that longtime New York City public servant Morgan Monaco will become the new President of the Alliance, the non-profit that operates the park in partnership with the City, and also the Prospect Park Administrator, a public appointment by NYC Parks.  Monaco, whose public sector career spans both government and non-profit organizations, brings extensive knowledge of park equity and community development to the position, as well as strong leadership in driving sustainable impact for civic organizations. Monaco is the first Black leader of the Alliance, further diversifying executive leadership within the open space sector, and continues the legacy of female leadership at the Alliance over the course of its 35-year history. Monaco succeeds former Prospect Park Alliance President Sue Donoghue, who was appointed New York City Parks Commissioner earlier this year. Monaco looks forward to working with the board, staff and most especially park users to help shape her vision for the park’s future. Coming out of the pandemic and recognizing the ways in which the park has been an invaluable resource for New Yorkers to recover, she looks forward to strengthening the organization’s capacity in order to keep pace with the needs of the park community and the robust use of the park. She plans to leverage her experience in working on citywide equity initiatives and serving vulnerable communities to explore the ways in which the Alliance can bring more social services to the park.
It is managed in partnership with Prospect Park Alliance.  © Prospect Park Alliance. All rights reserved.
Riot Games Singapore is to support Riot's existing titles and will have a major focus on developing the company's newer titles.[36] Jason Bunge was hired as Riot Games' chief marketing officer in October 2020.[37] In October 2021, the company bought Kanga, a services firm involved in "fan hubs", merchandising, and content aggregation.[38]  Riot Games collaborated with French animation studio Fortiche to release an animated series, Arcane. The series was released worldwide in November 2021 on Netflix, and by parent company Tencent in China, and received a favorable critical reception.[39][40] In March 2022, Riot Games announced that it had invested in Fortiche and, as a result, its chief content officer Brian Wright and director of corporate development Brendan Mulligan were joining Fortiche's board of directors.[41] That same month, Riot also hired executives from Netflix, Paramount, and HBO Max to head development of film, TV, and music endeavors built around the company's intellectual property.[42]  In October 2022, Riot acquired Wargaming Sydney—a subsidiary of Cyprus-based Wargaming that had originally developed the MMO middleware BigWorld—for an undisclosed amount, and renamed it Riot Sydney. The acquisition excludes rights to the BigWorld technology itself, as well as its publishing arm.[43]
note 1] The company also teased further games — Project A, a tactical shooter; Project L, a fighting game with League of Legends characters; and Project F, a multiplayer game set in Runeterra – that were not detailed outside of genre descriptions and brief gameplay clips.[28][29] Project A was later revealed to be Valorant, which entered closed beta on April 7, 2020[30] and was officially released on June 2, 2020.[31]   In December 2019, Riot Games announced Riot Forge, a publishing label headed by Leanne Loombe. The label partners with smaller game development studios for the creation of League of Legends games, with some games of this type already being in development.[32] Two titles from Riot Forge were announced at The Game Awards 2019: Ruined King: A League of Legends Story by Airship Syndicate, and Convergence: A League of Legends Story by Double Stallion Games.[33] Another division, Riot Tabletop, was announced in January 2020, to producing tabletop games; the first was Tellstones: King's Gambit, released in 2020.[34]  Riot acquired Hypixel Studios in April 2020, which they had been investing in over the previous eighteen months to help them publish Hytale, a voxel-based sandbox game.[35] Also in April, Riot announced plans to establish a Singapore office later that year.
Here's Gowrappan's memo to Yahoo staff: Team - We've entered a new chapter in our history, and I am tremendously proud of all that we have accomplished together over the past three years. Like the start of any next chapter, this is a natural moment for transition. I've made the decision to take on a new role as a senior advisor to Apollo. This role will enable me to support our next phase of growth and continued investment in the company. As such, I am excited to welcome Jim Lanzone as the new CEO of Yahoo effective September 27, 2021. Jim is a veteran technology and media leader with two decades of leadership experience and a deep track record of growth, innovation and an entrepreneurial spirit. I have every confidence he will be a terrific leader for the new Yahoo. Jim and I will work together to ensure a seamless transition, and I'm confident he will build on our successes and lead us into our future. What an incredible journey this has been. I joined the company three years ago as part of Verizon. Today, we're a standalone company with significant potential to grow beyond what we have accomplished thus far. We have the best team, with the right products, content and technology to shape the future of Yahoo. To reiterate what's been said many times over the past few months – this next chapter is a testament to the great work you've delivered against a focused strategy.
Eleven chief executives and interim leaders have led the Yahoo companies since 1995. They are:  For a list of all current and defunct services offered by Yahoo, see List of Yahoo!-owned sites and services.  On September 22, 2016, Yahoo disclosed a data breach that occurred in late 2014, in which information associated with at least 500 million user accounts,[99][100] one of the largest breaches reported to date.[101] The United States indicted four men, including two employees of Russia's Federal Security Service (FSB), for their involvement in the hack.[102][103] On December 14, 2016, the company revealed that another separate data breach had occurred in 2014, with hackers obtaining sensitive account information, including security questions, to at least one billion accounts.[104] The company stated that hackers had utilized stolen internal software to forge HTTP cookies.[105][106]  On October 3, 2017, the company stated that all 3 billion of its user accounts were affected by the August 2013 theft.[107][108][109][110][111]  On November 30, 2009, Yahoo was criticized by the Electronic Frontier Foundation for sending a DMCA notice to whistleblower website "Cryptome" for publicly posting details, prices, and procedures on obtaining private information pertaining to Yahoo's subscribers.[112]
By subscribing, I agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA Enterprise and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.					 Netflix added 2.41 million global subscribers in the third quarter of 2022, bringing its grand total to 223.09 million (73.39 million from the U.S. and Canada), a gain of +4.5 percent over the prior year’s comparable quarter. Q3 was the first quarter of 2022 when Netflix didn’t lose subs. According to Tuesday’s shareholder letter, executives at Netflix believe they’ll add 4.50 million subs globally in the final quarter of 2022. The streamer added 4.38 million subs in the year-ago quarter, which at the time represented 9.4 percent growth. So we’re not there — but we are well above the company’s tempered expectations; at the end of Q2, Netflix forecasted that it would add 1 million global subscribers in Q3. Clearly, it bested that — the same goes for its financial forecasts. Netflix earned $3.10 per share in the third quarter on $7.926 billion in revenue; its net income was $1.398 billion. Wall Street forecasted earnings of $2.13 per share on $7.84 billion in revenue. Back on July 19, Netflix itself estimated Q3 earnings per share of $2.
In the third quarter of 2022, the total revenue and net profit of Netflix decreased marginally by 1% and 3%, respectively, over that in the second quarter of 2022, according to GlobalData.  During the third quarter of 2022, Asia-Pacific accounted for 1.43 million additional customers of Netflix, which constituted the majority of the company's net subscriber increase. With just 100,000 net customers added, the Netflix area of the US and Canada experienced the slowest growth. From the fourth quarter of 2022, Netflix will stop providing guidance for paid memberships but will still reveal those figures when it releases its quarterly earnings.   United States of America United States of America United States of America United States of America Germany United States of America United States of America United States of America United States of America United States of America Don’t wait - discover a universe of connected data & insights with your next search. Browse over 28M data points across 22 industries.
Dónde Vives: Directed by Brenna Malloy. With Jason Beghe, Tracy Spiridakos, Marina Squerciati, Patrick John Flueger. A shocking murder pulls rookie officer ...
Posted by Chris on 2022-10-05 6:25PM    Hey, “Chicago P.D.” fans. We hope episode 3 was total fire aka great for you guys tonight. Now that episode 3 has officially done its thing, we are right back in your faces to take you on a brief journey into the future as we explore what the next, new episode 4 of Chicago PD’s current season 10 will be showing you when it comes out next Wednesday night, October 12, 2022. We were able to snag up an official teaser description for one of episode 4’s main storylines via NBC’s official episode 4 press release. So, we’re going to certainly take a look at it right now. Let’s go. First off, NBC revealed that there is an official title for this new episode 4 of Chicago PD’s current season 10. It turns out that the writers decided to name it, “DONDE VIVES.” It sounds like episode 4 will feature some more very scandalous, intense, dramatic, interesting, action-filled and suspenseful scenes. In the new episode 4, a shocking murder and a rookie officer will be the main focus of this storyline that NBC chose to serve up on a platter. Yep, it turns out that some major scandal will loom in this episode as very startling murder will take place at some point.
If you subscribe to a YouTube Premium family plan, you may want to check your email: Google is notifying users that the monthly cost of the service will be going up by $5 a month. Starting in November, most users will start paying $22.99 per month for YouTube Premium — though there seems to be some leeway. While the main announcement says that the price increase starts on the next billing cycle on or after November 21st, some legacy subscribers won't see their bill jump for several months. One Engadget staffer was informed that their price would not increase until April due to their status as a "long-standing and valued member." With the new price structure, the family plan is less of a bargain for smaller groups. At $17.99, buying into the family plan for just two users offered a significant savings over individual accounts. Now, a two-user family will save only $1 a month. For now, however, single-user prices remain the same: $11.99 a month for individual accounts and $6.99 for students. The benefits haven't changed either, with Premium still offering users an ad-free YouTube experience, the ability to download videos for offline viewing, access to YouTube Music, and the ability to continue to play music and videos in the background or with your phone screen off. At least you still don't need to subscribe to Premium to watch videos in 4K.
Subscribers of YouTube Premium’s Family Plan will have to pay an additional $5 for their subscription after the video-streaming platform upgraded the monthly fee by 28% to $22.99. YouTube made the announcement in an email to subscribers of the family tier in the US. The change has taken effect immediately for new subscribers, while existing customers were given a 30-day notice. The email to subscribers read: We created YouTube Premium to provide an uninterrupted YouTube experience, so you can get closer to the videos, creators, and music artists that you love. To continue delivering great service and features, we will be increasing your Premium family plan price from $17.99/month to $22.99/month. This change will take place on your next billing cycle starting on or after November 21, 2022. To check the status of your account and billing information, go to your Settings > Purchases and Memberships page. All members have the flexibility to pause or cancel anytime here. Reports say similar price changes are being rolled out in other markets like Canada where prices were increased to CAD $22.99 ($16.82) from CAD $17.99, and in the UK where prices were hiked to £19.99 ($22.64) per month from £17.99. With YouTube Premium, subscribers are able to watch videos on YouTube without ads and download videos and playlists on their mobile device to watch offline.
/VvHuaCKgGn — Santa Monica Studio – God of War Ragnarök (@SonySantaMonica) September 16, 2020  God of War Ragnarok is set to launch on November 9, 2022. Sony’s Santa Monica Studio shared the date with a new CGI trailer, which depicts Kratos and Atreus fighting a horde of foes before facing off against Fenrir, a giant wolf. In a blog shared on July 6, Santa Monica Studio shared that pre-orders for the game will begin from July 15. The blog also details several different versions of the game that will be available, including a collector’s edition that comes with a 16″ replica of Thor’s hammer. The confirmed release date is good news for fans, who have been waiting for months on news about the game’s launch. At the Sony PlayStation Showcase on September 9, developer Sony Santa Monica and publisher PlayStation Studios announced that God of War Ragnarok has been delayed to 2022. Speaking during a Q&A, Herman Hulst, Sony Interactive Entertainment‘s head of worldwide studios, talked about the pushback: “So we have, currently, two very big, very narrative-driven games in development: Horizon Forbidden West and the next God of War,” explained Hulst at the time. “For both of those, they’re frankly affected by access to performance capture and talent.
Here's the release date for God of War Ragnarok. God of War Ragnarok is official – for a long time, the name of the game was assumed, and the rumour mill was working hard to try and dissuade fans that Ragnarok would indeed be the final suffix for the title. The game is already making some big promises: developer Sony’s Santa Monica Studio has promised that the incoming game will complete the Norse storyline from the 2018 game, God of War… so you know the stakes are going to be high. Fan appetite for the game is clearly quite high, too: God Of War Ragnarok currently has the most views of all the trailers released at the last Sony PlayStation Showcase that took place on September 9, 2021. Given that most of those trailers are well into the muiti-million hit-count, that’s impressive. God of War: Ragnarok currently sits at over 12million views. Whoever said that fan desire for Sony exclusives was on the decrease? The game will carry on more or less straight from the previous title, with Kratos and Atreus venturing once more into the ancient Norse world, attempting to put a halt to that eponymous world-ending Ragnarok. For everything you need to know about the game – including the God of War Ragnarok release date – read on below. pic.twitter.
A first look of Ethan Hawke as the voice of Batman in Batwheels, the upcoming animated series debuting as part of the preschool block on Cartoonito on HBO Max and Cartoon Network, was revealed today.    The new clip features a scene from the upcoming half-hour special, “Secret Origin of the Batwheels,” premiering on Batman Day, Sept. 17, exclusively first on Cartoonito on HBO Max. The special will introduce viewers to Bam (the Batmobile), Bibi(the Batgirl Cycle), Redbird (Robin’s Sports Car), Batwing (the Batwing Jet Plane), and Buff (the Bat Truck), and tell the backstory of how this team of young sentient super-powered vehicles came to be.    The series will officially launch later this fall on Cartoonito on Cartoon Network and Cartoonito on HBO Max. Produced by Warner Bros. Animation, Batwheels marks DC’s first entry into preschool, offering young viewers a high-speed, vibrant CGI-animated iteration of the Caped Crusader. The show will follow a group of young sentient super-powered vehicles as they defend Gotham City alongside Batman, Robin, and Batgirl.    “Secret Origin of the Batwheels” description: (Special premieres Batman Day, Sept. 17 on Cartoonito on HBO Max)
Prank, the Jokermobile, and the rest of the villainous squad wreak havoc on Gotham City alongside The Joker, Catwoman, Harley Quinn, and more of the Caped Crusader’s infamous rogues gallery. Previously-announced DC Super Heroes joining Hawke’s Batman, Bertrand’s Bam, and Hudson’s Robin include the rest of the Batwheels team — Bibi (The Batgirl Cycle) voiced by Madigan Kacmar, Redbird (Robin’s Sports Car) voiced by Jordan Reed, The Batwing voiced by Lilimar, and Buff (The Bat Truck) voiced by Noah Bentley — plus Bat-family member Cassandra Cain/Batgirl voiced by Leah Lewis. The Batwheels are cared for by their trainer and mother figure Batcomputer, voiced by Kimberly D. Brooks, and Batman’s robot repairman Mo, voiced by Mick Wingert. They are a team of incredible crimefighters who have banded together to oppose evil, combat crime and clean up the streets of Gotham City. They are… okay, they’re NOT Batman and Robin. They’re the Batwheels – an awesome group of sentient super-powered crime-fighting vehicles defending Gotham City alongside Batman, Robin, Batgirl and a host of DC Super Heroes. Having just been created by the Batcomputer, our heroes are essentially kids with little to no life experience.
We use some essential cookies to make this website work. We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services. We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services. You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. Departments, agencies and public bodies News stories, speeches, letters and notices Detailed guidance, regulations and rules Reports, analysis and official statistics Consultations and strategy Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports The Prime Minister is the leader of His Majesty’s Government and is ultimately responsible for the policy and decisions of the government. As leader of the UK government the Prime Minister also: As Minister for the Union, the Prime Minister works to ensure that all of government is acting on behalf of the entire United Kingdom: England, Northern Ireland, Scotland, and Wales. Rishi Sunak became Prime Minister on 25 October 2022. He was previously appointed Chancellor of the Exchequer from 13 February 2020 to 5 July 2022. He was Chief Secretary to the Treasury from 24 July 2019 to 13 February 2020, and Parliamentary Under Secretary of State at the Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government from 9 January 2018 to 24 July 2019.
“The whole list of tax cuts and ideas that frankly, according to Sunak and others, belongs to Disneyland because none of it was going to be really possible without crashing the economy more,” he said. Sunak’s only challenger, Penny Mordaunt, leader of the House of Commons and former defence minister, was reportedly backed by 30 MPs compared with nearly 150 supporting Sunak. “This decision is an historic one and shows, once again, the diversity and talent of our party,” Mordaunt said in a statement as she withdrew from the race just minutes before the winner was due to be announced. “Rishi has my full support.” Sunak and Mordaunt had lost to Truss last month in the race to appoint a successor to then-Prime Minister Boris Johnson. He was forced to announce his resignation in July after a wave of scandals linked to parties held during the COVID-19 lockdown. Sunak will be the UK’s first leader of colour and the first Hindu to take the top job. At 42, he will also be the youngest prime minister in more than 200 years. The multimillionaire former hedge fund boss will be expected to impose deep spending cuts to try to rebuild the UK’s fiscal reputation, just as the country slides into a recession, dragged down by the surging costs of energy and food. He will also inherit a political party that has fractured along ideological lines, a challenge that damaged the fortunes of several former Conservative leaders.
We use some essential cookies to make this website work. We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services. We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services. You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. Departments, agencies and public bodies News stories, speeches, letters and notices Detailed guidance, regulations and rules Reports, analysis and official statistics Consultations and strategy Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports Rishi Sunak became Prime Minister on 25 October 2022. He was previously appointed Chancellor of the Exchequer from 13 February 2020 to 5 July 2022. He was Chief Secretary to the Treasury from 24 July 2019 to 13 February 2020, and Parliamentary Under Secretary of State at the Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government from 9 January 2018 to 24 July 2019. Rishi went to Winchester College and studied Politics, Philosophy and Economics at Oxford University. He was also a Fulbright Scholar at Stanford University (USA) where he studied for his MBA. Rishi was elected Conservative MP for Richmond (Yorks) in May 2015 and served as a Parliamentary Private Secretary at the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy from June 2017 until his ministerial appointment.
Rishi Sunak (/ˈrɪʃi ˈsuːnæk/ (listen) RISH-ee SOO-nak;[1][2] born 12 May 1980) is a British politician who has served as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom and Leader of the Conservative Party since 2022. He is the first British Asian prime minister. He previously held two cabinet positions under Boris Johnson, lastly as Chancellor of the Exchequer from 2020 to 2022. Sunak has been Member of Parliament (MP) for Richmond (Yorks) since 2015.  Sunak was born in Southampton to parents of Indian descent who immigrated to Britain from East Africa in the 1960s. He was educated at Winchester College, studied philosophy, politics and economics at Lincoln College, Oxford, and earned an MBA from Stanford University in California as a Fulbright Scholar. During his time at Oxford University, Sunak undertook an internship at Conservative Central Office, and joined the Conservative Party. After graduating, Sunak worked for Goldman Sachs and later as a partner at the hedge fund firms The Children's Investment Fund Management and Theleme Partners.  Sunak was elected to the House of Commons for Richmond in North Yorkshire at the 2015 general election. As a backbencher, Sunak supported the successful campaign for Brexit in the 2016 European Union membership referendum.
Related Stories Move over "Stranger Things," the next big Netflix hit may just be commercials. The streaming giant on Thursday is rolling out its cheapest membership tier, dubbed "Basic With Ads." The new tier will cost $6.99 per month, which makes it a full $3 cheaper than Netflix's current cheapest plan, the $9.99 Basic plan. It's Netflix's first foray into the ad-supported space — the streamer has for years resisted putting any advertising on its platform. The company's plan arrives on Nov. 3, a month before rival streaming service Disney+ will introduce its own ad-supported tier, and competes with ad-supported plans from services like Hulu and Peacock. The plan's launch comes as Netflix is preparing to crack down on password sharing on its platform. Beginning next year, Netflix will push people who borrow accounts to create their own, and will also give account-holders who share their passwords the ability to pay extra to have friends and family on their accounts. Here's what you need to know about Netflix's Basic With Ads tier. The Basic With Ads plan will operate similarly to the Basic plan. Users will have access to a 720p video stream — versus the 1080p stream offered by the $15.49 Standard plan and the 4K plan offered by the $19.99 Premium plan — which can be accessed from any internet-connected device.
Jump to        With a vast library of TV shows, movies, and original programming, most people would agree that Netflix is an essential part of the entertainment landscape and easily one of the best streaming services you can sign up for. Like its competitors, the price of Netflix varies depending on which subscription tier and features you choose. Netflix plans start at $7 a month, but to get the best video quality without ads you have to pay $20 a month. And due to Netflix's recent crackdown on password sharing in the US, it now costs an additional $8 a month to add an extra user to your account. The fee will only apply to users who live outside of an account holder's household. This year, Netflix announced another major change to its subscriptions: After 25 years, the streaming service is shuttering its DVD-rental services in September — an early part of Netflix's history that became synonymous with its red envelopes. The platform also recently removed its ad-free Basic plan, which means the its cheapest ad-free plan now starts at $15.49 a month. To help you decide which Netflix plan is right you, we've put together a guide detailing how much Netflix charges for each of its membership tiers. Netflix currently offers three streaming plans: Standard with Ads, Standard, and Premium, starting at $7 a month and ending at $20 a month. It will cost more to add another user to a subscription plan.
The fifth season of The Crown, which follows the life and reign of Queen Elizabeth II, was released by Netflix on 9 November 2022. It was the first season of the series to be released following both the death of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh on 9 April 2021 and the death of Queen Elizabeth II on 8 September 2022.  Imelda Staunton stars as Elizabeth, along with main cast members Jonathan Pryce, Lesley Manville, Jonny Lee Miller, Dominic West and Elizabeth Debicki. All cast members are new to the series; this season marked The Crown's final wholesale recasting, following the ensembles led by Claire Foy (seasons one and two) and Olivia Colman (seasons three and four).  The Crown traces the reign of Queen Elizabeth II from her wedding in 1947 through to the early 21st century.[3]  The fifth season covers the time period between 1991 and 1997, and is set during the premiership of John Major.[4] Events depicted include Elizabeth's annus horribilis in 1992, Diana's Panorama interview, the separation and divorce of Prince Charles and Diana, Elizabeth's state visit to Russia, use of Prince Philip's DNA to identify the remains of the Romanov family, the decommissioning of Britannia, the handover of Hong Kong, and Major's departure from office and the beginning of Tony Blair's premiership.
Every item on this page was chosen by a Town & Country editor. We may earn commission on some of the items you choose to buy. Imelda Staunton is taking over the role of Queen Elizabeth from Olivia Colman. Given everything that's been happening in the royal family in the last few years—including Queen Elizabeth's death in September, Harry and Meghan stepping back from their royal roles, and the controversy surrounding Prince Andrew—fans of The Crown have been anticipating a season set in the modern day. Though the series likely won't make it all the way to 2022, the critically acclaimed show will have a few more chapters. Season 5 of the critically acclaimed series premiered in full on Netflix in November 2022, and is now nominated for four Golden Globes, including a nomination for Best Drama Series, as well as Imelda Staunton for Best Television Actress in a Drama Series, Elizabeth Debicki for Best Supporting Actress in a Television Series, and Jonathan Pryce for Best Supporting Actor in a Television Series.  Staunton's nomination, in particular, has fans excited—if she wins, all three of the actresses who have helmed the show in the role of Queen Elizabeth II will have garnered the Best Actress Golden Globe. Watch The Crown In October 2022, Netflix finally dropped the first trailer for The Crown season 5.
By Luciana Bellini   Travel  |  22nd December 2022  Jennifer Coolidge reprises her role as the hapless Tanya in The White Lotus season 2, alongside her new husband Greg (played by Jon Gries), but the rest of the cast is filled with new faces, with more than a few you might recognise, including British actor Theo James, Aubrey Plaza of Parks and Recreation fame and the ever-brilliant Tom Hollander.  While season one was filmed exclusively in the Four Seasons Resort Maui at Wailea, due to pandemic-related restrictions, for the second season they’ve branched out from the dreamy environs of the hotel to take in some of Sicily’s most beautiful towns and coastal spots, leaving one question on everyone’s lips: just where was The White Lotus filmed? Here’s our guide to all the key filming locations in The White Lotus season 2.  As with the first season, most of the show is centred around the antics of the monied guests staying at an uber luxurious resort – in the first season that was the Four Seasons Resort Maui at Wailea in Hawaii, and for the second season the team chose another Four Seasons resort: the grand San Domenico Palace hotel in Taormina. Situated high on the rocks, it offers up splendid views over the Ionian Sea, Mount Etna and an ancient amphitheatre.
While The White Lotus was originally intended to be a standalone miniseries, the overwhelmingly positive reception and acclaim inspired White to utilize the anthology format to create another installment. Amidst the buzz around Season 2, HBO confirmed that the series had been renewed for another season. There haven’t been any details about returning cast members, but based on the Season 2 finale, we can guess that Tanya won’t be among them. While filming has not yet begun, White has teased that he’s interested in exploring "death and Eastern religion and spirituality." Considering that the show has already ventured to an American state and a European resort, creating a new installment set in Asia would certainly allow the series to go in a different direction. The first two seasons of The White Lotus are now available to stream on HBO Max. Liam Gaughan is a film and TV writer at Collider. He has been writing film reviews and news coverage for eight years with bylines at Dallas Observer, About.com, Taste of Cinema, Dallas Morning News, Schmoes Know, Rebel Scum, and Central Track. He aims to get his spec scripts produced and currently writes short films and stage plays. He lives in McKinney, TX.
Mark Kelly Democratic  Mark Kelly Democratic  The 2022 United States Senate election in Arizona was held on November 8, 2022, to elect a member of the United States Senate to represent the state of Arizona.  The seat was previously held by Republican John McCain, who won his final term in 2016. McCain died on August 25, 2018, and Governor Doug Ducey appointed former U.S. Senator Jon Kyl to fill the seat. Kyl resigned at the end of that year and Ducey replaced him with Martha McSally, who then lost to Democrat Mark Kelly in 2020. Primaries in Arizona took place on August 2. Kelly won renomination without opposition, while venture capitalist Blake Masters won the Republican nomination against a large field of candidates. Although Arizona typically leans Republican, Kelly led Masters by low single digits in aggregate polling. Kelly held a significant fundraising advantage until many Republican-aligned groups began spending to assist Masters in the final weeks of the campaign.[1] On November 1, Libertarian nominee Marc Victor dropped out of the race and endorsed Masters.[2][3][4]  Incumbent Democrat Mark Kelly won reelection, defeating Republican nominee Blake Masters by a comfortable margin.[5] This was the first time Democrats won a full term to this seat since 1962. The race was competitive and seen as crucial to determining party control of the U.S.
Advertisement Arizona Election Results Sen. House Gov/Statewide Measures Last updated: Dec. 6, 2022 10:34 p.m. EST Kelly's win puts Democrats one seat away from keeping control of the Senate, with Nevada and the Georgia runoff still outstanding. Scott Bland, Politics editor  Advertisement D+60 R+60 0 2004: R+58 2010: R+26 2016: R+14 2020: D+2 2022: D+5 $61,529 Arizona $63,015 Median of all states $46,511 $87,063 46% Arizona 29% Median of all states 7% 63% 30% Arizona 32% Median of all states 21% 45% Contact our team at interactives@politico.com. Associated Press, Federal Election Commission, House of Representatives clerk’s office, MIT Election Data and Science Lab, U.S. Census Bureau Project lead: Allan James Vestal Editing: Andrew Briz, Andrew McGill, Lily Mihalik Bhandari, Allan James Vestal Design & engineering: Aaron Albright, Kai Elwood-Dieu, Paula Friedrich, Beatrice Jin, Rashida Kamal, Andrew Milligan Scott Bland, Annette Choi, Rishika Dugyala, Marissa Martinez, Zach Montellaro, Steve Shepard, Jessica Piper, Mackenzie Wilkes  Terms of Service |       Privacy Policy |
Copyright 2023 The Associated Press. All Rights Reserved. The November midterm elections will determine which parties take control over the House and the Senate, ultimately defining the fate of President Joe Biden’s legislative agenda. (Oct. 14) WASHINGTON (AP) — Democrats have held both chambers of Congress and the presidency for the last two years, but they may not have such consolidated power for much longer.  Republicans are favored to win the House in the Nov. 8 midterm elections, bolstered by frustration over the economy and advantages in the redistricting process that takes place every 10 years. But Democrats are working to hold their ground, campaigning on maintaining access to abortion and other issues.  The outlook is murkier in the Senate, where Republicans are bidding to take back control. Several races in key battleground states are tight, leading Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell to say the chances of his party winning a majority are just 50-50.  A look at control of Congress and what will happen if Republicans win a majority in either chamber in the election:  Democrats, led by House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, have held the majority since 2018, when they won control in then-President Donald Trump’s first midterm election. Republicans could take back the House if they net just five seats in dozens of competitive districts, and they are trying to win dozens. History also gives Republicans reason for optimism.
Connecting decision makers to a dynamic network of information, people and ideas, Bloomberg quickly and accurately delivers business and financial information, news and insight around the world Americas+1 212 318 2000 EMEA+44 20 7330 7500 Asia Pacific+65 6212 1000 Connecting decision makers to a dynamic network of information, people and ideas, Bloomberg quickly and accurately delivers business and financial information, news and insight around the world Americas+1 212 318 2000 EMEA+44 20 7330 7500 Asia Pacific+65 6212 1000 ARTICLE Last Updated Dec. 7, 2022  IN THIS ARTICLE  What is the balance of power in the House?   How many seats were up for election in 2022?   What was the outlook for the 2022 midterm elections?   What were the races to watch in the 2022 House elections?   What were the major factors impacting the 2022 midterm House races?    Who was projected to take control of the House in 2022?   Learn about our custom news alerts, legislative and regulatory tracking, congressional and state legislator directories, and more. The GOP took control of the House. Republicans have 222 seats and Democrats have 213. [Virtual Event: Beyond the Midterms – Looking Ahead to the 118th Congress: Hear our experts discuss election outcomes and what they mean for policy priorities in the new Congress.
NevadaToday   Nevada Election Survey Project poll finds 52% of Nevadans plan to vote for Cortez Masto As Nevadans begin voting in the 2022 midterm election, a new University of Nevada, Reno poll of likely voters released today finds Catherine Cortez Masto leading in the race for U.S. senator and Steve Sisolak leading in the governor’s race. The governor’s race is within the margin of error, but the senate race is not. The Nevada Election Survey Project 2022 general election poll, which asked nearly 600 likely Nevada voters about their voting intentions and views on state and national officials, found 52% of Nevadans plan to vote for Cortez Masto, 39% for Adam Laxalt and 5% remain undecided. Cortez Masto’s large lead reflects less Republican voter enthusiasm for Laxalt’s candidacy compared to Joe Lombardo and other Republican candidates. Among likely Republican voters, 74% said they planned to support Laxalt, compared to 83% for Lombardo and 88% for their Republican House of Representatives candidate. More Republicans also plan to support Cortez Masto than other Democrats on the ballot. Even if this sample of Nevadans is unusually supportive of the incumbent senator, lower support among any likely Republican voters for Laxalt, in what others have polled as a very tight race, is noteworthy.
Advertisement Nevada Election Results Sen. House Gov/Statewide Measures Last updated: Dec. 6, 2022 10:34 p.m. EST Cortez Masto's victory hands control of the Senate to Democrats for another two years. Scott Bland, Politics editor  Advertisement D+30 R+30 0 2004: D+27 2010: D+6 2016: D+3 2022: D+1 $62,043 Nevada $63,015 Median of all states $46,511 $87,063 52% Nevada 29% Median of all states 7% 63% 25% Nevada 32% Median of all states 21% 45% Contact our team at interactives@politico.com. Associated Press, Federal Election Commission, House of Representatives clerk’s office, MIT Election Data and Science Lab, U.S. Census Bureau Project lead: Allan James Vestal Editing: Andrew Briz, Andrew McGill, Lily Mihalik Bhandari, Allan James Vestal Design & engineering: Aaron Albright, Kai Elwood-Dieu, Paula Friedrich, Beatrice Jin, Rashida Kamal, Andrew Milligan Scott Bland, Annette Choi, Rishika Dugyala, Marissa Martinez, Zach Montellaro, Steve Shepard, Jessica Piper, Mackenzie Wilkes  Terms of Service |       Privacy Policy |       Do not sell my info |       Notice to California Residents
By Matt Grobar  Film Reporter  EXCLUSIVE: Vertical Entertainment has secured North American rights to the horror feature Lullaby, directed by Annabelle‘s John R. Leonetti, from its financier Alcon Entertainment, slating it for release in select theaters and on VOD on December 16. (Watch Lullaby‘s new trailer, unveiled this morning, by clicking above.)  	Pic follows a new mother who discovers a lullaby in an ancient book and regards the song as a blessing. But her world transforms into a nightmare when the lullaby brings forth the ancient demon Lilith. Oona Chaplin (Avatar franchise) and Ramón Rodríguez (The Affair) lead the cast, which also includes Liane Balaban (You Can Live Forever), Kira Guloien (Women Talking) and Moni Ogunsuyi (The Umbrella Academy).  	           	Alex Greenfield and Ben Powell wrote the script, with Alcon’s Broderick Johnson and Andrew A. Kosove (Blade Runner 2049) producing alongside Envision Media Arts’ Lee Nelson and David Tish (The Ice Road). Exec producers included Alcon’s Carl Rogers and Scott Parish, Heroes and Villains’ Markus Goerg, Mikhail Nayfeld and Dick Hillenbrand, B3 Media’s Jeff Bowler, John Lewis and Bret Saxon, and Wonder Street’s Mark Holder.
“We are thrilled to be in business with industry leader Alcon Entertainment to release horror aficionado John Leonetti’s Lullaby,” said Vertical Entertainment Partner Peter Jarowey. “John’s love of the genre is renowned, and we feel it is the perfect film that our audience will flock to this holiday season.”  	Vertical Entertainment’s current and upcoming releases include Michael Jacobs’ Maybe I Do starring Diane Keaton, Susan Sarandon, Richard Gere, William H. Macy, Emma Roberts and Luke Bracey; K. Asher Levin’s Good Side of a Bad Man starring Emile Hirsch, Thomas Jane, Harvey Keitel and Ashley Benson; Darren Le Gallo’s Sam & Kate starring Dustin Hoffman and Sissy Spacek; Hans Canosa’s The Storied Life of A.J. Fikry, based on the New York Times bestselling novel by Gabrielle Zevin; John Patton Ford’s Sundance 2022 thriller Emily the Criminal starring Aubrey Plaza, who is nominated for a 2022 Gotham Award for Outstanding Lead Performance; the 2022 SXSW thriller Gone in the Night, directed by Eli Horowitz and starring Winona Ryder and John Gallagher Jr.
We've known for a while that Ncuti Gatwa is the next (well, it's a little more complicated than that right now, so spoiler alert for lower down the page) incumbent of the TARDIS, due to debut as the lead in Doctor Who next year. Now we know who will be his first main companion – Coronation Street's Millie Gibson, playing Ruby Sunday. "Whilst still being in total disbelief, I am beyond honoured to be cast as the Doctor’s companion," she says. "It is a gift of a role, and a dream come true, and I will do everything to try and fill the boots the fellow companions have travelled in before me. And what better way to do that than being by the fabulous Ncuti Gatwa’s side, I just can’t wait to get started." Ncuti Gatwa adds: "Millie just is the companion. She is full of talent, strength, she has a cheeky sparkle in her eye and is sharp as a razor. From the moment she walked into the room she captured all of our attention with her effervescence and then solidified that attention with the sheer torque of her talent. This adventure is going to be so wild and so fun, I cannot WAIT to sail the universe with Millie!” Russell T. Davies, who brought the series back in 2005 for its big relaunch, is returning to run it again starting next year.
Russell T Davies, Doctor Who showrunner, said: "It’s the great honour of my job to find the next generation of talent, and Millie shines like a star already. She’s brilliant, dynamic, clever and a wonderful actor. As a Coronation Street fan, I’ve seen Millie survive chases, guns and sieges, but that’s nothing compared to what lies ahead for Ruby Sunday." Sign up for the latest Who news, reviews, interviews and features By entering your details, you are agreeing to our terms and conditions and privacy policy. You can unsubscribe at any time. Doctor Who script editor Scott Handcock recently shared that secret auditions were held for the new companion in September, with Gatwa, the next Doctor, in attendance. Fans of the BBC sci-fi series were left surprised when last month's special, The Power of the Doctor, closed with Jodie Whittaker's Thirteenth Doctor regenerating into a Fourteenth incarnation played by David Tennant, who'd previously portrayed the Tenth Doctor. Tennant and Catherine Tate will return to Doctor Who for three special episodes, set to air in November 2023 to mark the show's 60th anniversary.
Photo: Norman Jean Roy Naomi Biden‘s recent nuptials have gone down in history as the first wedding of a grandchild of a sitting US president at the White House. And now, photos exclusive to Vogue reveal that an Arab designer was a major part of the bride’s big day. While she wore a Grace Kelly-inspired wedding gown by American brand Ralph Lauren to exchange vows with Peter Neal, Biden slipped into a sleek dress from Lebanese designer Reem Acra’s namesake label for the reception and cake-cutting ceremony. Photo: Norman Jean Roy The ivory Mikado silk gown created by Beirut-born Acra came with a delicate strapless neckline, and was made notably special with pearls belonging to Biden’s grandmother Roberta Buhle sewn into the sweeping six-foot train. Biden paired the dress with pearl jewelry of her own, and sheer gloves. Acra was also the designer of choice for First Lady Jill Biden, who wore two dresses from the brand on the day: A custom couture silk chiffon vintage blue dress with a teal wool crepe coat for the ceremony and a gold embroidered seafoam blue dress for the black-tie reception. Photo: Norman Jean Roy Naomi Biden is the daughter of US president Joe Biden’s younger son, Hunter, and his ex-wife Kathleen Buhle, and is an associate at the DC law firm Arnold & Porter.
“That was a big, big yes, because they’ve been so wonderful to us and so supportive of Markarian, and obviously, we said that we would be honored to work with them again on something so big.”  When Biden and Moon visited O’Neill’s studio for fittings, they were very clear about their vision. “[Naomi] wanted something that was fun [and] that was going to be easy to change into after wearing all of her more formal looks for the ceremony and rehearsal dinner. She wanted something that had a lot of movement, that was going to be easy to dance in,” O’Neill says. “We talked about some sparkly looks and some short dresses and something with a little more detail to it, and ultimately settled on a little hand-beaded fringe minidress. We added some really beautiful bows and satin with little trains coming off. It was really kind of the perfect combination of something that was fun, but also special and classic.” Ten of O’Neill’s team members also worked on the dress, which featured hand-done beadwork that was hand-sewn onto the bodice. “We worked really closely together on this,” she added.   The project was a joy for O’Neill, 36, and an opportunity to work with another young talent whose business was lifted in its early days by the Bidens.
Group standings are based on points from those three group-stage matches — three points for a win, one for a draw, none for a loss.  The top two teams from each group based on total points advance to the single-game knockouts. If teams are tied on points, goal difference is the first tiebreaker followed by goals scored. If teams are also tied in those categories another set of tiebreakers is applied.  The winners of the last World Cup in 2018, France will be determined to retain the crown, although they will have to fare considerably better than they did at Euro 2021, when they were knocked out at the Round of 16 stage by Switzerland.  If superstar Kylian Mbappe is at his best, then it could make all the difference for Les Bleus, and there is plenty of other international experience also in Didier Deschamps’ talented squad despite a rash of injuries heading into the tournament. France won the 2020/2021 UEFA Nations League by beating Spain in the final, and if they can perform as a cohesive unit then they will certainly be among the leading contenders for glory in Qatar. The Socceroos won a single-elimination FIFA intercontinental playoff to earn the final place in Group D, beating Peru in a penalty shootout on June 13.
The group stage at the 2022 World Cup is complete, here's how all 16 teams won a place in the knockout bracket. QUALIFIED: Brazil, France, Portugal, Netherlands, Senegal, England, United States, Australia, Argentina, Poland, Morocco, Croatia, Japan, Spain, South Korea, Switzerland ELIMINATED: Qatar, Canada, Ecuador, Iran, Wales, Denmark, Tunisia, Mexico, Saudi Arabia, Belgium, Germany, Costa Rica, Uruguay, Ghana, Cameroon, Serbia - Explained: How the World Cup tiebreakers worked - World Cup 2022: News and features | Schedule | Squads Nov. 20 Qatar 0-2 Ecuador Nov. 21 Senegal 0-1 Netherlands Nov. 25 Qatar 1-3 Senegal Netherlands 1-1 Ecuador Nov. 29 Netherlands 2-0 Qatar Ecuador 1-2 Senegal Nov. 21 England 6-2 IR Iran United States 1-1 Wales Nov. 25 Wales 0-2 IR Iran England 0-0 United States Nov. 29 Wales 0-3 England Iran 0-1 United States Nov. 22 Argentina 1-2 Saudi Arabia Mexico 0-0 Poland Nov. 26 Argentina 2-0 Mexico Poland 2-0 Saudi Arabia Nov.
0 Portugal Brazil Portugal 4 6 Brazil 1 Morocco 1 1 Switzerland South Korea The U.S. men’s national team will play in the most balanced World Cup group, Group B. According to the FIFA’s rankings, there are only 15 positions between the highest-ranked team in the group, England, which is fifth, and the lowest, Iran, which is 20th. Conversely, there are 52 positions between the two extremes in Group H, which contains Portugal, ranked ninth, and Ghana, ranked at a tournament-low 61st. 32 teams for a trophy  Eight groups of four teams will pull from the six FIFA confederations. Group Group Group Group A B C D FIFA rank 1st 3 Argentina 4 France 5 England 8 Nether. 10 10 Denm. 13 Mexico U.S. 16 18 Senegal Wales 19 20 20 Iran 26 Poland 30 Tunisia 30 38 40 Australia 44 Ecuador 50 Qatar 50 51 Saudi Arabia 60 Group Group Group Group e f g h FIFA rank 1st 1 Brazil 2 Belgium 7 Spain 9 Port. 10 11 Germany 14 Urug. 15 Switz.
The group stage at the 2022 World Cup is complete, here's how all 16 teams won a place in the knockout bracket. QUALIFIED: Brazil, France, Portugal, Netherlands, Senegal, England, United States, Australia, Argentina, Poland, Morocco, Croatia, Japan, Spain, South Korea, Switzerland ELIMINATED: Qatar, Canada, Ecuador, Iran, Wales, Denmark, Tunisia, Mexico, Saudi Arabia, Belgium, Germany, Costa Rica, Uruguay, Ghana, Cameroon, Serbia - Explained: How the World Cup tiebreakers worked - World Cup 2022: News and features | Schedule | Squads Nov. 20 Qatar 0-2 Ecuador Nov. 21 Senegal 0-1 Netherlands Nov. 25 Qatar 1-3 Senegal Netherlands 1-1 Ecuador Nov. 29 Netherlands 2-0 Qatar Ecuador 1-2 Senegal Nov. 21 England 6-2 IR Iran United States 1-1 Wales Nov. 25 Wales 0-2 IR Iran England 0-0 United States Nov. 29 Wales 0-3 England Iran 0-1 United States Nov. 22 Argentina 1-2 Saudi Arabia Mexico 0-0 Poland Nov. 26 Argentina 2-0 Mexico Poland 2-0 Saudi Arabia Nov.
Group C of the 2022 FIFA World Cup took place from 22 to 30 November 2022.[1] The group consisted of eventual champions Argentina, Saudi Arabia, Mexico and Poland. The top two teams, Argentina and Poland, advanced to the round of 16. This marked the first time that Mexico did not advance past the first round since 1978.[2]  The teams were decided by the World Cup draw that took place on 1 April 2022.[3] The group was set to receive one team from each pot, which sorted all World Cup teams by position on the FIFA World Rankings.[3]  Notes  The first match of the group was between Argentina and Saudi Arabia. The two teams had faced each other four times prior to the tournament, most recently in 2012, a 0–0 draw in a friendly game. Saudi Arabia defeated Argentina and ended their 36-match unbeaten streak.[6] According to Gracenote, the win was the "most surprising" in World Cup history, with many calling it one of the biggest World Cup upsets in history.[7] This was also the second consecutive time that Argentina did not win their opening match at a World Cup, after drawing 1–1 with Iceland in 2018; and the first time since 1990 that Argentina lost their opening match.
Recap/highlights: Argentina 1-2 Saudi Arabia - Lusail Iconic Stadium, LusailRecap/highlights: Mexico 0-0 Poland - Stadium 974, DohaRecap/highlights: Poland 2-0 Saudi Arabia - Education City Stadium, Al RayyanRecap/highlights: Argentina 2-0 Mexico - Lusail Iconic Stadium, LusailRecap/highlights: Poland 0-2 Argentina - Stadium 974, DohaRecap/highlights: Saudi Arabia 1-2 Mexico - Lusail Iconic Stadium, Lusail           Follow along with ProSoccerTalk for the latest news, scores, storylines, and updates surrounding the 2022 World Cup, and be sure to subscribe to NBC Sports on YouTube!  1. Argentina -- 6 points (+3) - IN THE LAST 162. Poland -- 4 points (0) - IN THE LAST 163. Mexico -- 4 points (-1) - ELIMINATED4.
Paramount+'s new Criminal Minds series is Criminal Minds: Evolution.  By Mark McKee | Published 11 months ago  CBS had a relative TV goldmine from 2005 to 2020 when the FBI Behavior Analysis Unit traveled the country, bringing to justice the worst criminals within the borders. Criminal Minds revolutionized the murder mystery on TV with a stellar cast of characters that used their expert talents in human nature to chase after the worst the country had to offer. Spencer Reid, Derek Morgan, Jennifer Jareau, David Rossi, Aaron Hotchner, and Emily Prentiss captivated audiences for a decade and a half before the show came to an end in 2020. Fans didn’t have to wait long for news of a revival, as the team couldn’t stay away from a new series premiering this Fall on Paramount+. The latest iteration of the series has now found its title. Deadline reports the new series will appear under the title Criminal Minds: Evolution.  Just before the pandemic began, fans saw the BAU chase after The Chameleon to close out a series that had to create 15 years of diabolical murderers without allowing it to get stale. The series ended with Spencer Reid in a coma and traversing the memories of agents he worked with in the past.
Next: Criminal Minds Reboot Confirms Who BAU’s Most Important Character Is
New Head Football Coach Matt Rhule, live coverage right now on air @WOWT6News #Huskers pic.twitter.com/rr9eerBvtW Rhule wouldn’t share specific plans about who he might be bringing along with him, but said he would definitely be talking with — and listening to — players, coaches, and staff before making changes. Coming off a big win on Black Friday, Huskers are most interested in hearing about whether Interim Head Coach Mickey Joseph, who took the helm after Scott Frost was fired, would be retained. “I reached out to Mickey right when I got the job. Looking forward to talking to him at some point and talking to the rest of the staff. I’ve been on both sides of it,” Rhule said. “I’ve been an assistant coach on a staff that’s been let go, and I’ve always appreciated the coach coming in and talking to me. So I’ll try to be thorough with that process over the next couple of days.” Alberts said the decision about whether to keep Joseph was entirely in Rhule’s hands. “Ultimately, this is going to be Matt Rhule’s decision,” Alberts said. “He’s the head coach and he needs to hire the 10 assistant head coaches he believes gives him the best opportunity.” Rhule also talked Monday about his affinity for Nebraska. “My son is this YouTube generation. I have seen the Tunnel Walk maybe 5,000 times.
His final season at Baylor included 11 regular season wins, a spot in the Big 12 Championship Game and a New Year’s Six Bowl appearance.  Then came a less stellar NFL stint that ended after an 11-27 record in two-and-a-half seasons. It’s unclear what the exact contract details are as the Panthers owe over $40 million in buyout money. It’s also unclear what the hire means for interim head coach Mickey Joseph and Nebraska’s assistants.  Rhule will have a tall task ahead of him. Neither of the last two head coaches in Lincoln left with a winning record, and no coach has left on his own volition since Tom Osborne retired 25 years ago. The Huskers just wrapped up a 4-8 season and have not had a winning season or reached a bowl game since 2016.  But the financial resources, fan support, brand and facilities are in place to be competitive toward the top of the Big Ten. “It is a tremendous honor to be chosen to lead the Nebraska Football program,” Rhule said in a release. “When you think of great, tradition-rich programs in college football Nebraska is right at the top of the list.  The fan base is second to none, and I consider it a privilege to have the opportunity to coach in Memorial Stadium on Tom Osborne Field. sports@dailynebraskan.com Senior Sports Editor   Your browser is out of date and potentially vulnerable to security risks.
Across the Yahoo Network           Thu, October 27, 2022 at 2:01:02 PM EDT        The voice behind TikTok’s text-to-speech feature has spoken — and she’s a Canadian local radio host.  Kat Callaghan hosts The Beat on 91.5 FM in Ontario. She also made a major reveal this month: She’s the voice of TikTok’s text-to-speech feature. Iconic! Callaghan confessed in her very first TikTok video.  For a long time I didn’t say a word. But …  yes it’s me and yes I have an ongoing awesome relationship with the folks at TikTok. 🎉 The coolest part for me is watching the creativity & awesome content that people are putting out there using my voice. (Also oddly enough this is my first TikTok) “When you guys have been asking me if I’m the voice on TikTok,” the text-to-speech caption said. “Finally I can tell you guys: It is me,” Callaghan said in her authentic voice.  In the caption, she explained that she has an awesome ongoing relationship with TikTok.  “The coolest part for me is watching the creativity & awesome content that people are putting out there using my voice,” Callaghan wrote.  The video received over 29.4 million views. Some were in shock, but not everyone believed she was the voice they had heard for so long.
Some were convinced, while others were skeptical. "Idk why I’m not 100% convinced," one user shared.  "I thought the voice was automated, another commented.  "If it’s really you, say something in the same way, a commenter wrote.  Callaghan created an FAQ-style post in another TikTok video where she answered questions from the comments section, explaining she wouldn’t "lie" about being the voice of TikTok given her experience doing voice-overs, being a radio host, and hosting a podcast. RELATED: TikTok algorithm mystery: What we know, and don’t know, about the Chinese government's control of the app She then impersonated how the text-to-speech voice sounds on the app. "Yes, I’m the TikTok text-to-speech girl, my name is Kat, she began in the clip. "I work with TikTok on TTS and other projects, I love working with TikTok, and I love seeing your TikToks. Sometimes you guys make me say some pretty horrendous things, It’s pretty messed up. But I kind of think it’s funny, I don’t mind it at all." People this time were convinced that she is the actual voice of TikTok. "The Siri of our generation!!!" one person wrote.  "Y is this so life changing," another exclaimed.  "Woah u sound exactly like the TikTok voice," a user commented.
Here are the words that defined 2022. BuzzFeed News Reporter BuzzFeed News Reporter At the end of every calendar year, dictionaries around the globe select one word to sum up how language morphed in the preceding 12 months, to recognize a trend in mainstream vernacular and comment on the human condition at that moment in time. Come December, we are bombarded with dozens of different words, which always cast a wide net, paint a vague picture, and interchangeably solicit reactions from “yikes” to “sure.” Here’s a look at the many words of the year, selected by the lexicographical powers that be. gaslighting (n.): “the act or practice of grossly misleading someone especially for one’s own advantage.” Why was it chosen: M-W cites the “age of misinformation” we live in, and a 1,740% increase in lookups of the word this year. Though I kind of feel like I’m being gaslighted into believing this is the year this word gained relevancy, and not, say, six years ago. Also in the running: oligarch, Omicron, codify, LGBTQIA, sentient, loamy, raid, Queen Consort Ford Proctor and Austin Wynns of the San Francisco Giants after Proctor hit a grand slam home run against the Rockies on Sept. 29, 2022. homer (n.): “an informal American English term for a home run in baseball.
‘Vax’ is Oxford Dictionary’s 2021 word of the year Also on the list was “codify,” driven by the Supreme Court ruling overturning Roe v. Wade; “loamy,” which saw a massive increase in lookups as the Aug. 29 answer for the word game Quordle; and “raid,” with interest peaking after the FBI executed a search warrant at Trump’s Mar-a-Lago residence. The 2022 word of the year chosen by the U.K.-based Collins Dictionary was “permacrisis,” which it defined as “an extended period of instability and insecurity” and said “sums up quite succinctly just how truly awful 2022 has been for so many people.” The publisher of the Oxford English Dictionary, meanwhile, is opening the pick to the public for the first time this year. Voting continues until Friday. The choices? “Metaverse,” “#IStandWith” and “Goblin mode.
Founder Lee Soo-man also teased the formation of NCT sub-units from Tokyo, Saudi Arabia and potentially Singapore South Korean entertainment company SM Entertainment will be setting up its Southeast Asian headquarters in Singapore. CNBC reported yesterday (November 30) that the label – home to some of K-pop’s top acts such as aespa, NCT, Girls’ Generation, EXO and more – has plans to expand its operations in the Southeast Asian region by setting up headquarters for the region in Singapore. According to CNBC, SM Entertainment are currently in the process of recruitment for its Singapore branch. SM Entertainment’s Singapore base of operations will be “managing joint ventures in Indonesia, Vietnam and Thailand, as well as communicating with [its South Korea office] for other related ventures and plans.” Lee Soo-man, founder of SM Entertainment, also told the outlet that he would be keen on launching an NCT sub-unit in the region dubbed NCT Singapore, however it remains unclear if these plans have been set in stone. Despite declining to share specifics of the company’s investment in its expansion into Singapore, representatives of SM have shared that it is currently “in the midst of hiring more local talents, which will hopefully increase the full-time staff count”. Its Singaporean office is also looking to hire “local undergraduates or fresh graduates for internships”.
In Japan, SM co-publishes Avex Trax releases for artists including Ayumi Hamasaki, Namie Amuro, and Koda Kumi, as well as Johnny's Entertainment artists such as Arashi and KAT-TUN.[12]  After graduating from California State University, Northridge in the United States, Lee Soo-man returned to Korea and in 1989 established what was then known as "SM Studio" in the Apgujeong neighborhood of Gangnam, Seoul and signed singer Hyun Jin-young. During the 1990s, SM Studio developed an in-house system that looked after all aspects of its artists' careers.[13] Lee's approach was targeted at teenage audiences, and took a holistic view of the qualities needed to become a successful entertainer.[14] In February 1995, the company changed its name to SM Entertainment and set up its capital fund.[15] SM then developed an in-house production system and created a string of successful artists, including boy band H.O.T. in 1996, girl group S.E.S. in 1997, boy band Shinhwa in 1998, R&B duo Fly to the Sky in 1999, and soloist BoA in 2000.  Jung Hae-ik was appointed CEO at the time of SM's official reestablishment in 1995,[16]  and was succeeded by Kim Kyung-wook in 1998.[citation needed]
7%) in May 2020 and July 2020. Unemployment in the transportation sector was above overall unemployment. BLS reports that the U.S. unemployment rate, not seasonally adjusted, in November 2022 was 3.4% or 1.2 percentage points below the transportation sector rate. Seasonally adjusted, the U.S. unemployment rate in November 2022 was 3.7%.     In addition to the update of the Unemployment in Transportation dashboard, BTS also released its monthly update to its Employment in Transportation: Total, by Mode, and Women, and Race and Hispanic or Latino Ethnicity of Transportation Workers dashboards. Charts Updated this Month by Section include: Unemployment in the Transportation and Warehousing Sector and in Transportation and Material Moving Occupations Monthly Employment in the Transportation and Warehousing Sector, Establishment Data Monthly Employment in the Transportation and Warehousing Sector by Race and Hispanic or Latino Ethnicity, Household Data   Visit Transportation Economic Trends for more topics. Media contact: BTSNews@dot.gov or 1-800-853-1351.   U.S.
7 percent), and Hispanics (3.9 percent) showed little or no change over the month. These data are from the Current Population Survey and are seasonally adjusted. See "The Employment Situation — November 2022" to learn more. Also see charts of Employment Situation data. Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, The Economics Daily, Unemployment rate 3.7 percent in November 2022 at https://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2022/unemployment-rate-3-7-percent-in-november-2022.htm (visited August 08, 2023).
Ale Bedoya joins ESPN FC Daily to discuss the USMNT's dramatic victory over Iran. (1:42) Tuesday's dramatic 1-0 win over Iran was just the ticket for the US, as they finished second in Group B behind England and therefore booked their spot in the round of 16. Up next, however, is another potentially tricky opponent: the Netherlands, who finished top of Group A by virtue of beating Senegal and host nation Qatar in Group A. The two will go head-to-head at Khalifa International Stadium on Saturday (10 a.m. ET) to see who advances to the quarterfinals, where the winning team will take on Argentina or Australia on that side of the bracket. Can the US keep this momentum going? Or will the Dutch, led from midfield by the mercurial Frenkie De Jong, bring that dream to an end? - World Cup 2022: News and features | Schedule ESPN's Kyle Bonagura and ESPN Netherlands' Bob Ligthart break down Saturday's game. If every team in the World Cup were judged based on how they've played in the first half alone, the United States would be considered one the best teams in the tournament. On a per/first-half basis, they rank No. 5 in chances created (5.3), No. 10 in xG (0.7) and No. 6 in goals (0.7).
The scenario for the US men's national team at the 2022 FIFA World Cup is simple: win and you are in. USA will clinch a berth in the Round of 16 if: USA will be eliminated if: USA are an underdog to surpass Iran in Tuesday's Group B finale (2 pm ET | FOX, Telemundo).
Advertisement  December 12, 2022 at 10:45 AM EST Argentina will play either France or Morocco in the World Cup final after they beat Croatia 3-0 on Tuesday. Lionel Messi opened the scoring from the spot before Julian Alvarez grabbed another. Manchester City forward Alvarez then added the third after the half-time break, following a sensational solo run from Messi. France and Morocco play in the second semi-final on Wednesday.  (Photo: Getty Images) December 13, 2022 at 5:45 PM EST Liam Tharme, Dermot Corrigan and Maram AlBaharna have broken down the key talking points from Argentina’s comprehensive victory over Croatia, including: GO FURTHER Argentina beat Croatia to reach final: Alvarez stars, magical Messi assist, goodbye Modric Advertisement December 13, 2022 at 5:42 PM EST  With three matches left in this World Cup, we have four standout candidates for the Golden Boot, two from Argentina and two from France:  The first tiebreaker for the award is assists, where Messi leads Mbappe by a count of three to two.
Press "Options" on your remote for languages available in your region. WHO ARE ARGENTINA'S POTENTIAL OPPONENTS IN THE SEMI-FINALS?* If Argentina were to make it to the semifinals as Group C winners, they could face Spain or South American rivals Brazil.* If Argentina reach the semifinals as Group C runners-up, they could face the potential winners of Groups F and H - either Belgium or 2016 European champions Portugal.WHO COULD ARGENTINA FACE IN THE FINAL?* If Argentina go all the way to the final as Group C winners, they could potentially find themselves taking on either England or France.* If Argentina are able to make it to the final as Group C runners-up, they could meet the Netherlands, Brazil or Spain. * Argentina, who are second in Group C on three points, can guarantee progress with a win over Poland, top on four, in their final game on Wednesday.WHO ARE ARGENTINA'S POTENTIAL OPPONENTS IN THE ROUND OF 16?* If Argentina qualify for the round of 16, they will be pitted against a team from Group D, meaning they could face France, Tunisia, Denmark or Australia.* If Argentina win Group C, their round of 16 tie will be against the runners-up in Group D.* If Argentina finish runners-up in Group C, their round of 16 tie will be against the winners of Group D, potentially 2018 champions France.
Democrats also won the Governor’s office, State Senate, and appear poised to take the State Assembly, and voters affirmed abortion rights in the state. — Albert Sun Nov. 9, 2022 House districts rated as tossups have been called mostly in favor of Democrats so far, with one state as a glaring exception: New York. Republicans have won in four of five New York tossup seats, and the Republican candidate is ahead in the fifth. — Lauren Leatherby Nov. 9, 2022 More than 210 Republicans who questioned the 2020 election have won seats in the U.S. House and Senate and in state races for governor, secretary of state and attorney general, according to results as of 12 p.m. Eastern on Wednesday. Here’s who won › — NYT Graphics Nov. 9, 2022 While the race for Georgia’s senate seat remains extremely tight, the Governor’s race was decided last night. Brian Kemp gained more votes compared to Trump in 2020 all across Georgia, beating Stacey Abrams by a more than seven-point margin.  — Lazaro Gamio Nov. 9, 2022 J.D. Vance won Ohio handily even as almost every part of the state voted more for Democrats than they did in 2020.  — Lazaro Gamio Nov.
Democrats gained the Senate majority by winning both of Georgia’s January 5 runoff elections. Jon Ossoff and Rev. Raphael Warnock defeated Republican Sens. David Perdue and Kelly Loeffler, respectively, giving Democrats 50 seats and control with Vice President-elect Kamala Harris acting as the tie-breaker. In November, Biden became the first Democrat to win Georgia since Bill Clinton in 1992.
Prepare to watch Margot Robbie, Ryan Gosling, Issa Rae, and Simu Liu ham it up in Greta Gerwig's dreamscape. Come on Barbie, let’s go party! A new clip from Greta Gerwig's Barbie just dropped, and it looks like we won't be spending all of our time in the real world this weekend. As Margot Robbie (Barbie) tells America Ferrera, we're officially going to Barbieland. Still, everyone's favorite Mattel doll has her sights set on more than just a little fun. The preview may look like a candy-colored dreamland—but after she's leaves Barbieland, Barbie (and... Ken) go on an epic adventure to the human world in search of true happiness.  Barbie is Gerwig's latest directorial endeavor, which she wrote alongside her partner, Noah Baumbach. Margot Robbie stars as Barbie—or, at least, one of the Barbies—and Ryan Gosling and his cursed platinum blonde hair will take on Ken.)  The trailer begins with Barbie saying hello to her fellow dolls, while Ken vies for her attention. Then, we get all-too-brief glimpses of Robbie, Gosling, Issa Rae, and Simu Liu hamming it up in the Barbie-verse before Barbie and Ken decide to leave town. The movie hits theaters this Friday.
Rumours about Lipa's involvement in the film started in May 2022, so we're very pleased they became a reality (as real as Barbie gets anyway...).  As for the line-up of Ken dolls, as well as Gosling, of course, three-time Emmy winner Will Ferrell is joined by the likes of Marvel's Simu Liu, new Doctor Who star Ncuti Gatwa, One Night in Miami...'s Kingsley Ben-Adir, and Grace and Frankie's Scott Evans.  Following news that Robbie won't be the only star to play Barbie, Mackey revealed to Empire in July 2022 that outside of filming, the cast gathered for a slumber party. And it was a Barbie-only party for the actors who play the famed doll figure.  'Right in the beginning, we had a sleepover for the Barbies,' Mackey told the news outlet. Referring to co-stars Evans and Gatwa, she added that it 'would involve playing games with Scott and Ncuti'.  Sharing details about the cast's fun moments away from set, Mackey admitted: 'I don't play games usually, because I get so competitive and angry. But Scott and I were top of the game.'  She also spoke about her feeling towards playing Barbie in the film, saying: 'It's great to do comedy. Barbie is light and funny and silly and American and pink.
Tyler Adams will captain the US men’s national team into the 2022 FIFA World Cup, head coach Gregg Berhalter announced on the eve of Monday’s Group B opener vs. Wales (2 pm ET | FOX, Telemundo). The Leeds United midfielder and New York Red Bulls homegrown product will be the USMNT’s youngest captain since Walter Bahr at the 1950 World Cup. He’s already worn the armband nine times during 32 career international appearances. “We think he has great leadership capabilities,” Berhalter said of the 23-year-old Wappingers Falls, New York native. “He leads by his actions and his words.” FIFA requires teams to name a singular captain for the tournament; the USMNT were the last of 32 Qatar-qualified squads to complete that task. During Berhalter’s tenure, the USMNT have relied on a leadership council and rotating armband responsibilities. Chelsea forward Christian Pulisic and Nashville SC center back Walker Zimmerman were other leading candidates to be named captain. “A lot of credit to my teammates,” Adams said, “because anyone throughout our leadership council can wear that armband and represent us with pride and represent us in the right way." Adams debuted for the Red Bulls in 2016 before moving to Europe in the winter of 2019, then to German Bundesliga side RB Leipzig.
His emotional control and composure are a huge part of what he does.  "He is not afraid to 'carry the water', to do the dirty work, to really grind. His communication style is not all big speeches, it's very one-to-one. He listens as much as he talks. And he can communicate nonverbally, because people pick up on that better." Walker didn't instantly concur with the method Berhalter chose in allowing his players to pick the World Cup captain but says the coach "wore me down." He made the point that such a democratic way of choosing a leader only works if the culture of your group is strong. The longer this tournament progresses, the more united this USA squad appears. "Tyler is the perfect captain for this group," Walker added. "He is one of them. It is remarkable to think, he's the same age as (Jacksonville Jaguars quarterback) Trevor Lawrence. He's younger than (current Steelers QB) Kenny Pickett. He's younger than the Michigan punter. This could be an NCAA team by age, and their main leader reflects that." Christian Pulisic is the best-known U.S. player and has the nickname "Captain America" at Chelsea, but Adams' role and spot on the field are better suited to the captaincy.
Yahoo Finance unveils its 2022 Company of the Year: Costco. - Let's get to the top three things you need to know as the clock hits 9:00 AM. We've got the big reveal. Yahoo Finance has crowned the 2022 Company of the Year. We're going to bring you the details, plus interviews with top executives all day here at Yahoo Finance. You don't want to miss it. - Oh my. I wonder who it is. But first, a check on the markets. Futures are slightly in the red here to start the week after a better than expected jobs report on Friday casts doubt on how quickly the Fed can ease the pace of interest rate hikes. - Plus, stocks in Hong Kong and mainland China are in rally mode after local authorities took more steps to ease COVID-19 policies, giving hope of a full reopening in China. - But we begin today with my favorite story. The end of the year is upon us. And that means Yahoo Finance, we have unveiled or officially announced its 2022 Company of the Year. The land of $1.50 hot dogs and unmatched customer loyalty takes the crown this year. And you guessed it, it's Costco, folks. I flew out to the Costco stomping grounds in Washington to go inside the retailer's business. Here's what I learned. Costco has seen a lot since opening its first warehouse store in Seattle, Washington in 1983.
Shares soared in 2021, then plunged in 2022, and they’re now around where they were before the move into crypto. Block is back to Square 1. And when we picked Zoom (ZOOM) in 2020, we wondered whether the "meme" darling of the COVID lockdown era would maintain its momentum once COVID faded and people went back to work. Turns out, not. Zoom had an epic year in 2020, with the stock up nearly 400%. Since then, however, it’s down 87%%. Zoom out. Some COTY winners, though, are as influential as they were when we chose them, or more so. Nvidia (2016) is now one of the nation’s foundational tech companies, with microchips that power everything from video games to artificial intelligence. Amazon (AMZN), the winner in 2017, is still the dominant online retailer, though others are catching up—including Target (TGT), our 2019 winner. Microsoft (MSFT), our 2021 winner, has fallen back to earth like most tech companies this year, yet it powers ahead with a suite of terrific franchises. Preordained greatness is not one of our criteria for selecting the Company of the Year, so we don’t mind if some of our choices lose their luster after their moment of glory.
Copyright 2023 The Associated Press. All Rights Reserved. President Joe Biden speaks in the South Court Auditorium on the White House complex in Washington, Thursday, Dec. 8, 2022, about the infusion of nearly $36 billion to shore up a financially troubled union pension plan, preventing severe cuts to the retirement incomes of more than 350,000 Teamster workers and retirees across the United States. (AP Photo/Susan Walsh) President Joe Biden speaks in the South Court Auditorium on the White House complex in Washington, Thursday, Dec. 8, 2022, about the infusion of nearly $36 billion to shore up a financially troubled union pension plan, preventing severe cuts to the retirement incomes of more than 350,000 Teamster workers and retirees across the United States. (AP Photo/Susan Walsh) President Joe Biden speaks in the South Court Auditorium on the White House complex in Washington, Thursday, Dec. 8, 2022, about the infusion of nearly $36 billion to shore up a financially troubled union pension plan, preventing severe cuts to the retirement incomes of more than 350,000 Teamster workers and retirees across the United States.
Biden Celebrates $90 Billion Bailout of Private Union Pension Plans  President Joe Biden jetted off to Cleveland on Wednesday evening to announce the official launch of a $90 billion bailout of union retirement plans—one that's completely paid for with federal borrowing. The bailout was approved last year as part of the American Rescue Plan, the $1.9 trillion emergency spending bill that was ostensibly meant to combat COVID-19 but included an impressive array of spending that had nothing to do with public health. The bailout will direct funds to more than 200 nearly insolvent multiemployer pension plans, which are established jointly by unions and the private companies that contract with them through collective bargaining agreements. "With today's actions, millions of workers will have the dignified retirement they earned and they deserve," Biden told the cheering crowd at a Cleveland high school. Millions of union workers, that is. If you're not part of that select club, there's no bailout coming your way—even as a sagging economy eats into private retirement savings, inflation makes every saved dollar worth less, and Social Security looms on the brink of insolvency. Oh, and you'll have to pay back (with interest!) the money borrowed to make this bailout (and the rest of the American Rescue Plan) possible. Sounds like a great deal, right?
NCAAF 47  USC quarterback Caleb Williams won the 2022 Maxwell Award on Thursday, given to the best player in college football. Here’s what you need to know: Williams was the best quarterback in America this season, so the Maxwell Award was deserved. Williams led USC’s turnaround from a four-win team to a top-10 squad in 2022 and elevated the players around him. Now his sights turn to Saturday night and the Heisman Trophy. — Morales Duggan’s story has been one of the best in college football, starting TCU’s season as the backup quarterback before leading the Horned Frogs to a 12-0 start. His toughness and perseverance helped pull the Frogs out of multiple second-half deficits and without his poise, leadership and production late in games, TCU wouldn’t be in the College Football Playoff. Winning the O’Brien and being a Heisman finalist are both well-deserved honors for Duggan. — Khan  Chuck Bednarik Award – Defensive Player of the Year Biletnikoff Award – Outstanding Receiver Lou Groza Collegiate Place-Kicker Award – Outstanding Kicker Ray Guy Award – Punter of the Year Maxwell Award – Player of the Year Davey O’Brien National Quarterback Award – Best Quarterback Outland Trophy – Most Outstanding Interior Lineman Paycom Jim Thorpe Award – Best Defensive Back Doak Walker Award – Premier Running Back (Photo: Gary A.
NOTE: CollegeFootballPoll.com's Dave Congrove is a voter for the Maxwell and Bednarik awards, two of the most prestigious individual awards in college football. The Maxwell Football Club today announced its watch list for the 86th Maxwell Award presented annually to the outstanding player in college football. The Maxwell Award has been presented to the College Player of the Year since 1937 and is named in honor of Robert “Tiny” Maxwell who was a former standout at the Swarthmore College and a renowned sports writer and football official. The Maxwell Award watch list will once again incorporate a broad spectrum of Football Bowl Subdivision (FBS) programs and conferences from coast to coast, led by Bryce Young (Alabama) who was the 2021 winner. Young is joined by 7 additional returning semifinalists, Grayson McCall (Coastal Carolina), C.J. Stroud (Ohio State), Tanner Mordecai (SMU), Sean Tucker (Syracuse), Bijan Robinson (Texas), Brennen Armstrong (Virginia) and Sam Hartman (Wake Forest). The full list consists of 85 players with Ohio State having 3 candidates and an additional 14 schools having two players represented. Young joins A.J. McCarron, Derrick Henry, Tua Tagovailoa and DeVonta Smith as the fifth Crimson Tide player to be selected as the Maxwell Award winner.
1934: Egypt, 1970: Morocco, 1974: Zaire, 1978: Tunisia, 1982: Algeria & Cameroon, 1986: Algeria, 1990: Egypt, 1994: Cameroon & Morocco, 1998: Cameroon, Morocco, South Africa & Tunisia, 2002: Cameroon, Nigeria, South Africa & Tunisia, 2006: Angola, Ivory Coast, Togo & Tunisia, 2010: Algeria, Cameroon, Ivory Coast, Nigeria & South Africa, 2014: Cameroon, Ivory Coast & Ghana, 2018: Egypt, Morocco, Nigeria, Senegal & Tunisia, 2022: Cameroon, Ghana & Tunisia Egypt were the first team from Africa to play at the World Cup — losing 4-2 to Hungary in the first round in Italy in 1934. Including their elimination, African teams have fallen in the first round 38 times. However, even when African sides have bowed out early it has rarely been without incident. Some notable highlights have been Zaire reportedly not knowing the rules for a free kick in 1974, Roger Milla dancing by the corner flag in 1990 and South Africa’s Siphiwe Tshabalala’s opening goal in the 2010 tournament — the only one to be held in Africa — resulting in a continent exploding in joy.
1990: Cameroon, 2002: Senegal, 2010: Ghana Three African teams have gone out in the quarter-finals of the World Cup and all did so in painful fashion. Cameroon became the first African side to make the last eight in Italy in 1990. They stunned defending champions Argentina in the tournament’s opening game at the San Siro and that momentum saw them go on and top a group also containing Romania and the Soviet Union. They then beat Colombia 2-1 in extra time in the round of 16, with a 38-year-old Milla scoring a brace to sink the South Americans. With the continent in dreamland, the Indomitable Lions took on England in the quarter-finals. David Platt scored for England in the first half, before Emmanuel Kunde equalised from the spot in the 61st minute. Four minutes later Eugene Ekeke gave Cameroon the lead and the world was 25 minutes from a first African semi-finalist. However, Gary Lineker equalised from the penalty spot and then won it in extra time with another penalty. Cameroon were out but had taken a continent on the journey of a lifetime. Advertisement Senegal followed in Cameroon’s footsteps in 2002 in South Korea and Japan — in more ways than one. They beat the defending champions (France) in the tournament’s opening game on their way to qualifying for the knockout stages.
Frontline workers, advocates, scientists, Young Wonders and everyday people were saluted and 8 nonprofit organizations working to tackle these issues were highlighted.  Each organization received $10,000 and viewers were encouraged to donate to these vetted, trusted organizations. [20]  In lieu of the traditional Top 10 and CNN Hero of the Year, the 2020 edition saw viewers selecting the year's Most Inspirational Moments. [21]  The nonprofit organizations highlighted included:  The 3 Young Wonders of 2020 (in alphabetical order):  The 15th Annual CNN Heroes All-Star Tribute returned to the long-running shows' traditional format honoring the Top 10 CNN Heroes of 2021 with viewers voting online for the CNN Hero of the Year.  Shirley Raines was selected as the 2021 CNN Hero of the Year.  Honorees included:  Young Wonders recognized included:  The 16th Annual CNN Heroes: An All-Star Tribute premiered live on Sunday December 11th, 2022.  Nelly Cheboi was selected by viewers as the 2022 CNN Hero of the Year.  Honorees included:  Young Wonders recognized included:  In 2022, the program was honored with the News & Documentary Emmy Award for Outstanding Live News Special for its 2021 15th Annual Show.
Subscribe to CNN Press Room Email Updates VOTING TO SELECT THE ‘CNN HERO OF THE YEAR’ BEGINS TODAY AT CNNHEROES.COM   HOSTED BY ANDERSON COOPER AND KELLY RIPA  THE 16th ANNUAL CNN HEROES: AN ALL-STAR TRIBUTE WILL AIR LIVE SUNDAY, DECEMBER 11TH AT 8PM ET Top 10 CNN Heroes:  http://bitly.ws/wcpA  One hero helps fellow veterans heal the wounds of war through art and music, another upcycles tech to teach Kenya’s next generation, while another leads teams of medics into global hotspots. They help immigrants and refugees build new lives in the US, teach people how to grow and prepare their own healthy food, and give aging seniors peace of mind by caring for their beloved pets. These are just some of the ways in which this year’s Top 10 CNN Heroes have dedicated their lives to changing the world. The 2022 Top 10 CNN Heroes were revealed today by Anderson Cooper on CNN This Morning. The Peabody and Emmy Award-winning campaign honors individuals who are making extraordinary contributions to help improve the lives of others. Cooper will be joined again this year by Kelly Ripa as co-host of CNN Heroes: An All-Star Tribute.
Hopefully, some of the student body will come and check us out and cheer us on, as well.” The No. 1 seeded BU men’s lacrosse team will play No. 5 seeded Loyola Maryland in the Patriot League semifinal Friday, May 5, at 4 pm on Nickerson Field. The other semifinal game, between No. 2 seeded Army West Point and No. 3 seeded Lehigh will take place at 7 pm Friday on Nickerson Field. The winners of both games will meet in the championship game on Sunday, May 7, at noon on Nickerson Field. All games are free for students with a Sports Pass. Admission to both semifinal games for those without a Sports Pass is $8. Admission to Sunday’s championship game for those without a Sports Pass is $8. Packages for all three games are $12. Free tickets are available for BU faculty and staff who register in advance here. All games will be streamed via CBS Sports Network. Men’s Lacrosse Looks for Patriot League Championship Repeat   							Charles Moore (COM’24)						 						is pursuing a degree in journalism with a minor in history. He works in the Worcester Red Sox front office and is the Head Delegate for BU's competitive Model United Nations Team. Charles is from Wayland, MA., and has seen a home game of all 30 Major League Baseball teams. He can be reached at csm6@bu.edu.						 							Profile
Game Recap: Men's Lacrosse |  May 06, 2023  vs. Loyola University Maryland (Championship Game) 5/7/2023 | 12:00 PM                          CBS Sports Network                          vs. Loyola University Maryland (Championship Game) 5/7/2023 | 12:00 PM                          CBS Sports Network                          Thanks for visiting ! The use of software that blocks ads hinders our ability to serve you the content you came here to enjoy. We ask that you consider turning off your ad blocker so we can deliver you the best experience possible while you are here. Thank you for your support!
<strong data-cart-timer="" role="text"></strong>                        (WASHINGTON)—The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts will present the 24th Mark Twain Prize for American Humor to Adam Sandler on March 19, 2023 in the Kennedy Center Concert Hall. The Prize, which is named to honor one of the world’s greatest humorists, will be awarded at a gala performance featuring some of the biggest names in comedy. Broadcast details will be announced at a later date. The Mark Twain Prize for American Humor recognizes individuals who have had an impact on American society in ways similar to the distinguished 19th-century novelist and essayist Samuel Clemens, best known as Mark Twain. As a social commentator, satirist, and creator of characters, Clemens was a fearless observer of society, who startled many while delighting and informing many more with his uncompromising perspective on social injustice and personal folly. “Adam Sandler has entertained audiences for over three decades with his films, music, and his tenure as a fan favorite cast member on SNL,” said Kennedy Center President Deborah F. Rutter about this year’s recipient. “Adam has created characters that have made us laugh, cry, and cry from laughing. I am looking forward to a laughter-filled evening like no other as we celebrate his career at a ceremony that is sure to bring together the best in comedy.
Read More The inaugural Mark Twain Prize was presented to Richard Pryor during the first annual Kennedy Center Celebration of American Humor, October 20, 1998. The event was created by the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Bob Kaminsky, Peter Kaminsky, Mark Krantz, and John Schreiber and is televised annually. The Kennedy Center is grateful to Cappy McGarr for his steadfast support of the Mark Twain Prize for American Humor since its inception. Previous recipients of the Mark Twain include Richard Pryor (1998), Jonathan Winters (1999), Carl Reiner (2000), Whoopi Goldberg (2001), Bob Newhart (2002), Lily Tomlin (2003), Lorne Michaels (2004), Steve Martin (2005), Neil Simon (2006), Billy Crystal (2007), George Carlin (2008), Bill Cosby (2009, rescinded in 2018) Tina Fey (2010), Will Ferrell (2011), Ellen DeGeneres (2012), Carol Burnett (2013) Jay Leno (2014), Eddie Murphy (2015), Bill Murray (2016), David Letterman (2017), Julia Louis-Dreyfus (2018), Dave Chappelle (2019), and Jon Stewart (2022). Explore artist pages below.                  New Videos Added!
The NCAA had four major priorities in it search for a new president to look after college athletics. It wanted a former college athlete, an exec passionate about higher education, an established corporate leader and a savvy politician who knows how to get things done in government. The governing body found all of those traits and more in Massachusetts Gov. Charlie Baker, a former Harvard basketball athlete and avid sports fan. The NCAA announced today that it has selected the two-term governor to be its next president. Baker will replace outgoing NCAA President Mark Emmert starting March 1. His second term as governor is slated to conclude Jan. 5; he announced about a year ago that he wouldn’t seek a third term. Emmert will stay on as an adviser through June. The NCAA’s choice of Baker, 66, signifies the association’s desire to have a leader who is well-versed in the ways that Washington, D.C., works. With the NCAA facing so many legal and legislative challenges, the board of governors, who made the hire, focused on someone from the political arena early in the process and Baker emerged as the candidate with the experience and expertise to navigate the governmental and athletic worlds that often collide in college sports. When asked why he wanted the job, Baker replied, “Because it’s worth doing. Yeah, it’s big and complicated, but so have been a lot of things in my life.“ Baker represents the first NCAA leader who doesn’t have a background in college athletics or higher education.
Play Now                                                           Football Pick'em                                                               Play Now                                                           College Pick'em   See who to add and drop   PGA Tour and beyond  The first issue for the next NCAA president: What is the association even going to look like for Mark Emmert's successor? That's the key question in assembling a list of candidates to replace Emmert, who announced Tuesday that he's resigning effective June 2023. The NCAA he is leaving behind is in a bit of shambles. There must be some certainty before the next leader evaluates what they are getting into.  That's why it's probably wise to have a lengthy timeline. The NCAA is in the middle of reconstructing its constitution. The association is losing its grip on the FBS. The next president may literally be a glorified liaison to Congress. Point being: if Congress has oversight over name, image and likeness, it isn't going to stop there.  Emmert's successor cannot be bogged down in minutiae. Running the NCAA in the future will have to be about appeasing the Power Five. If not, those schools have the means to break off on their own.  First, history would suggest the NCAA has to lean away from hiring a school president as its next leader.  Dick Schultz (1988-93), the former Virginia president, was run out in scandal.
Copyright 2023 The Associated Press. All Rights Reserved. Elon Musk said Thursday he has found a new CEO for Twitter, or X Corp. as it’s now called — and it’s a woman. He did not name her but said she will be starting in about six weeks. In February, he told a conference he anticipated finding a CEO for San Francisco-based Twitter “probably toward the end of this year.” (May 11) Elon Musk confirmed that the new CEO for Twitter will be NBCUniversal’s Linda Yaccarino, an executive with deep ties to the advertising industry.  “I am excited to welcome Linda Yaccarino as the new CEO of Twitter!” Musk wrote in a Friday tweet. He added that Yaccarino “will focus primarily on business operations” while Musk will stay closely connected to product design and new technology. Before that announcement, NBCUniversal said Friday that Yaccarino would step down immediately as chairwoman for global advertising and partnerships.  Musk, who bought Twitter last fall and has been running it since, has long insisted that he would step down as top executive at the company, which is now called X Corp.  Few expect Musk to remove himself from the decision making process at Twitter, however.  “While he’s stepping back from the CEO title, Musk is far from likely to step back from calling the product shots,” said Mike Proulx, research director at Forrester Research.
160] Twitter named former Goldman Sachs executive Anthony Noto as the company's CFO in July 2014, with an "annual salary of $250,000 and one-time restricted stock options of 1.5 million shares ... valued at $61.5 million".[161] On June 10, 2015, Twitter announced its CEO Dick Costolo would resign on July 1, 2015.[162] Noto was said to be considered a potential replacement for outgoing CEO Costolo.[163] On October 14, 2015, former Google chief business officer Omid Kordestani became executive chairman, replacing Dorsey who remains CEO.[164] On January 26, 2016, Leslie Berland, former executive vice president of global advertising, marketing, and digital partnerships at American Express, was named chief marketing officer.[165] In November 2016, COO Adam Bain announced his resignation and CFO Anthony Noto took over Bain's role.[166][167] A month later, on December 20, 2016, CTO Adam Messinger announced that he too was leaving.[168][169]  In February 2020, it was reported that Elliott Management Corporation had acquired a stake in Twitter, with activist shareholder and Republican Party supporter Paul Singer expected to seek the removal of Dorsey as CEO.[170] Twitter agreed to appoint a new independent director and two new board members, and to perform $2 billion in share buybacks.
With Daniel Alegre on board, Yuga Labs is expected to ramp up its metaverse efforts. Previously, he held leadership positions at Google, Activision Blizzard and Bertelsmann.  Yuga Labs, the company behind the Bored Ape Yacht Club (BAYC) and CryptoPunks nonfungible token (NFT) collections, has a new CEO, Daniel Alegre. The executive resigned as president and chief operating officer of the gaming giant Activision Blizzard to join the NFT startup on April 1. “Couldn’t be more excited for this next chapter,” he wrote on Twitter. Alegre was a crucial player in Activision Blizzard’s growth in recent years, overseeing popular gaming franchises like Call of Duty, World of Warcraft, Diablo and Candy Crush.  Today is my last day as President and COO of Activision Blizzard.  Thank you to the incredible teams who create truly epic games.  Tomorrow I officially start at CEO of Yuga Labs.  Couldn't be more excited for this next chapter. pic.twitter.com/eo3RfIyz0q The executive has been involved in the gaming, entertainment and technology industries for many years.
What Yuga Labs wants to build after raising $450M
(Photo by Jordan Strauss/Invision/AP)             “ Avatar: The Way of Water ” didn’t make quite as big of a splash as many assumed it would, but James Cameron’s big budget spectacle still helped breathe life into the box office this weekend. The sequel earned $134 million from North American theaters and $300.5 million internationally for a $434.5 million global debut, according to studio estimates on Sunday.  It tied with “The Batman” as the fourth highest domestic debut of the year, behind “Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness” ( $187.4 million in May ), “Black Panther: Wakanda Forever,” ( $181 million in November ) and “Thor: Love and Thunder” ($144.2 million in July).  Expectations were enormous for “Avatar 2,” which carried a reported price tag of over $350 million, the pressure of following up the highest grossing film of all time (thanks in part to various re-releases) over a decade later and the daunting task of propping up an exhibition business that’s still far from normal. Everything “Avatar” is oversized, though: the Na’vi characters, the runtime (a staggering three hours and 12 minutes), the technical advancements and the release strategy from 20th Century Studios and The Walt Disney Co.  Going into the weekend many were expecting a domestic debut of at least $150 million.
James Cameron’s highly anticipated Avatar: The Way of Water earned $53 million in its opening day release in the U.S., almost double the opening day success of its blockbuster predecessor, although it’s only the sixth-best film opening this year, and Cameron needs it to be a huge blockbuster to justify its nine-figure budget. 'Avatar: The Way of Water' made $53 million in its opening day release. The Disney and 20th Century Studios sequel to 2009’s Avatar—the highest-grossing film of all time—opened in more than 4,200 theaters this weekend, collecting $17 million in Thursday previews and another $36 million on Friday, Variety reported—nearly double the $26.7 million the first Avatar made on its opening day. Deadline projects it to make between $130 million and $150 million domestically this weekend, short of the $150 million to $170 million it had been projected to make. It falls short of the initial success of four Marvel and DC Comics sequels released earlier this year: Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness, which made $90.7 on its opening day, as well as Black Panther: Wakanda Forever ($84.2 million), Thor: Love and Thunder ($69.5 million) and The Batman (56.6 million). It was also narrowly edged out by Jurassic World Dominion, another sequel in the rebooted Jurassic Park franchise, which made $59.5 million on its opening day.
LOS ANGELES (Apr. 6, 2023) – SQUARE ENIX® today announced that the beloved FINAL FANTASY® pixel remaster series, previously only available on Steam® and mobile platforms, is launching digitally for PlayStation®4 (PS4™) console and Nintendo Switch™ system on April 19, 2023*. The pixel remaster series which comprises of FINAL FANTASY I through FINAL FANTASY VI, brings all the magic of the originals combined with quality-of-life upgrades while staying faithful to the retro design of these masterpieces.   Watch the FINAL FANTASY Pixel Remaster | PS4 & Nintendo Switch Release Date trailer here.   In FINAL FANTASY pixel remaster series, players can expect some unique features for PlayStation 4 and Nintendo Switch version, including the option to switch between the rearranged and original-based soundtrack for the game, as well as a choice of in-game fonts – players can now opt to play using the game’s default font or a pixel-based font. Additionally, PlayStation 4 and Nintendo Switch players can also expect additional boost features to expand gameplay options, including switching off random encounters and adjusting experience gained multipliers between 0 and 4.  All six titles in the FINAL FANTASY pixel remaster series will be available to digitally purchase individually or as a complete series in the FINAL FANTASY I-VI BUNDLE from PlayStation™ Store or Nintendo eShop.
LOS ANGELES (Dec. 19, 2022) – SQUARE ENIX® today revealed that the beloved FINAL FANTASY® pixel remaster series, previously only available on Steam® and mobile platforms, is launching on PlayStation®4 (PS4™) and Nintendo Switch™ in Spring 2023. The pixel remaster series brings all the magic of the originals combined with quality-of-life upgrades while staying faithful to the retro design of these masterpieces.   The digital version of all six titles in the FINAL FANTASY pixel remaster series, FINAL FANTASY I through FINAL FANTASY VI, can be purchased individually or as a bundle. Available in limited quantities, the newly announced physical edition of FINAL FANTASY I-VI PIXEL REMASTER -FF35th Anniversary Edition- includes:   © 1987, 1988, 1990, 1991, 1992, 1994, 2022 SQUARE ENIX CO., LTD. All Rights Reserved. LOGO ILLUSTRATION: © 1991, 1992, 1994, 2006, 2007 YOSHITAKA AMANO                                     FINAL FANTASY, the FINAL FANTASY PIXEL REMASTER logo, DRAGON QUEST, SPACE INVADERS, SQUARE ENIX, the SQUARE ENIX logo and TAITO are registered trademarks or trademarks of the Square Enix group of companies.
[1/2]Guillermo del Toro accepts the Oscar for Best Animated Feature Film for "Guillermo Del Toro's Pinocchio" during the Oscars show at the 95th Academy Awards in Hollywood, Los Angeles, California, U.S., March 12, 2023. REUTERS/Carlos Barria By Danielle Broadway LOS ANGELES, March 12 (Reuters) - Mexican filmmaker Guillermo del Toro's "Pinocchio" won the Academy Award for best animated feature film on Sunday, the third Oscar of his career. The haunting stop-motion musical fantasy was inspired by the 1883 Italian novel "The Adventures of Pinocchio" by Carlo Collodi, and informed by Gris Grimly's illustrations of the 2002 edition of the book. Del Toro, 58, reimagines the classic story of Pinocchio, a wooden puppet who dreams of being a real boy, who is cared for by carver Geppetto. However, the story of the Netflix Inc (NFLX.O) film is set in Fascist Italy during the interwar period and World War Two. "Pinocchio" prevailed over other popular nominees A24's stop-motion film "Marcel the Shell With Shoes On" and the Walt Disney Co (DIS.N) 3D animated film "Turning Red." Del Toro has many accolades, including his 2018 Oscar wins for best picture and best director for "The Shape of Water.
Even though 'Puss In Boots: The Last Wish' put up quite a fight, 'Pinocchio' has dominated the circuit  								By   	Clayton Davis  Senior Awards Editor  Variety Awards Circuit section is the home for all awards news and related content throughout the year, featuring the following: the official predictions for the upcoming Oscars, Emmys, Grammys and Tony awards ceremonies, curated by Variety senior awards editor Clayton Davis. The prediction pages are Davis’ assessment of the current standings of the race and do not reflect personal preferences for any film or performance. Like any organization or body that votes, each individual category is fluid and subject to change. Predictions are updated every Thursday.   LAST UPDATED: March 9, 2023  CATEGORY COMMENTARY:   	               	We don’t need to entertain this any further. Netflix’s “Guillermo del Toro’s Pinocchio” has won every possible award for animation on its march to the 95th Oscars ceremony, including the Annies, ACE and PGA awards.  	Guillermo del Toro will be the first person, and Latino, to have Oscars for best picture, director and animation, along with Netflix becoming the first streamer to win this category. He previously won statuettes for “The Shape of Water” (2017).  	Everyone loves Guillermo!
2022 YG is a near-Earth asteroid and a potential quasi-satellite of Earth, discovered by amateur astronomer Gennadiy Borisov at Nauchnyi, Crimea on 15 December 2022. It has an estimated diameter of 16–30 meters, given H of 26.6, and an albedo 4-15%.[a]    This near-Earth asteroid-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
Our planet has a strong gravitational connection with the Moon. But sometimes the gravity of the Earth can also capture small asteroids, which then remain for a certain period of time, orbiting us as a kind of temporary moon. This has happened at least twice this century: “mini-moons” have remained in Earth’s orbit for several years or even less. But the newly discovered asteroid 2022 YG has probably been trapped in gravity for several decades. An interesting space rock was first observed on December 15, 2022. Interestingly, one of the first to notice it was amateur astronomer Henadii Borisov from Crimea, also known for the discovery of the first known interstellar comet, which now bears his name.  Asteroid 2022 YG, as it is originally catalogued, has a diameter of 16-30 meters. Early computer models of its orbit showed that it completed a total orbit of the Earth in one year. Moreover, this has been happening since about 1961. The simulation showed that the quasi-moon will continue to orbit the Earth until 2181, when it can finally free itself from the gravity of the Earth. Visualization of the orbital data for the year 2022 YG also shows that it takes a strange path around our planet, stretching into an elongated ellipse in one direction, then migrating back to a rounder orbit and stretching again in the other direction before the whole cycle repeats.
The 2022 Peach Bowl was a college football bowl game played on December 31, 2022, at Mercedes-Benz Stadium in Atlanta, Georgia. The 55th annual Peach Bowl and one of the two College Football Playoff semifinals, the game featured two of the four teams selected by the College Football Playoff Selection Committee—Georgia from the Southeastern Conference (SEC) and Ohio State from the Big Ten Conference. Georgia won, 42–41, when Ohio State kicker Noah Ruggles' potential game-winning 50-yard field goal with 3 seconds left in the game sailed wide left. Georgia advanced to face the winner of the Fiesta Bowl, TCU, in the 2023 College Football National Championship at SoFi Stadium in Inglewood, California on January 9, 2023. The game began at 8:21 p.m. EST[3] and was aired on ESPN.[4] It was one of the 2022–23 bowl games concluding the 2022 FBS football season. Sponsored by restaurant chain Chick-fil-A, the game was officially known as the College Football Playoff Semifinal at the Chick-fil-A Peach Bowl.  The game featured Georgia, undefeated champion of the Southeastern Conference (SEC), and Ohio State, a one-loss team from the Big Ten Conference selected at-large by the College Football Playoff (CFP) committee.
Learn More Buy Tickets   Your independent guide to the best live sports in Atlanta! This website is operated by a ticket broker.Ticket prices are set by third-party sellers and may be above or below face value.We are not affiliated with nor endorsed by the Peach Bowl.  The Peach Bowl 2023 game is returning to Mercedes-Benz Stadium in Atlanta, GA on December 30th!  We don't know yet who will receive invitations to this year's game, but if you live in the Atlanta area, you can get your tickets early and join in on a great football game. Check out the links below for more info about this year's game, and visit regularly for updates.  And be sure to score your Peach Bowl 2023 Tickets soon, before the best ones sell out! Chick-fil-A Peach BowlMercedes-Benz StadiumAtlanta, GA Friday, August 11th, 20238:00 PM Saturday, August 12th, 20238:00 PM Monday, August 14th, 20238:00 PM Friday, August 18th, 20237:30 PM Thursday, August 24th, 20237:30 PM Saturday, August 26th, 20237:30 PM Wednesday, August 30th, 20237:30 PM Friday, September 1st, 20237:30 PM Saturday, September 9th, 2023
Jan 9, 2023 TEMPE, Arizona — No. 16 Michigan Tech won the 2023 Desert Hockey Classic with a 3-2 victory over No. 6 Boston University Saturday at Mullett Arena. The Huskies jumped out to a 3-0 first-period lead and held on for their third regular season tournament championship under Coach Shawhan. “It was goaltending, goaltending, goaltending,” said Shawhan. “Blake gave us a chance. We scored enough in the first and held on. I couldn’t be prouder of this group. They keep finding a way.” Blake Pietila was named tournament MVP after stopping 31 shots in the title game and 24 in the semifinal win over the host Arizona State. “It feels good after coming off the GLI and our rough showing in the first game,” Blake Pietila said. “We knew that we had to stick to our game plan tonight. They’re a fast-transitioning team, so we had to stick to our (defensive) zone coverage like we’ve done all year.” Tech scored all of its goals in the opening period. Logan Pietila gave the Huskies the lead 7:06 into the game. Jed Pietila fed Logan backdoor through traffic, and he corralled the pass and flipped in his fifth goal of the season.
The Huskies return to the Desert Hockey Classic for the second time after winning the tournament in January 2016. Tech plays at Arizona State on January 6 and wraps up the tournament against either Air Force or Boston University. January continues by hosting St. Thomas on January 13-14. The Huskies travel to Ferris State for their only regular-season meeting with the Bulldogs the next weekend (Jan. 20-21). The Huskies and Wildcats meet to wrap up the month. The rivalry takes place Friday in Houghton and Saturday in Marquette. The final month of the regular season begins at Bemidji State on February 3-4. Bowling Green comes to town for the annual Winter Carnival series on February 10-11. The regular season wraps up at Minnesota State on February 24-25. The top four teams after the regular season will host the opening round of the CCHA Mason Cup Playoffs on March 3-5 with a best-of-three series. Both semifinals (Mar. 11) and the CCHA Championship Game (Mar. 18) will be played as a single game at the highest remaining seed. The NCAA Tournament opens play on March 23-25 with regional sites in Allentown, Pa, Bridgeport, Conn., Fargo, N.D., and Manchester, N.H. The 2023 Frozen Four is set to take place at Amalie Arena in Tampa, Fla.
Microsoft will introduce a new, lower-cost tier of Microsoft 365, its product family of productivity software, collaboration and cloud-based services, starting on January 30. Called Microsoft 365 Basic and priced at $1.99 per month or $19.99 per year, the plan will initially include 100 GB of storage, Outlook email and access to support experts for help with Microsoft 365 and Windows 11. Existing OneDrive 100 GB subscribers will be transitioned to Microsoft 365 Basic beginning January 30 as well, Microsoft says. And in the coming months, Microsoft 365 Basic plan members will get “advanced security features” like ransomware recovery and password-protected sharing links in OneDrive. Importantly, Microsoft 365 Basic is not replacing the free Microsoft 365 tier. That’s here to stay, along with the same benefits it offers today, including access to the web-based versions of Word, Excel, PowerPoint, OneNote, Outlook, OneDrive, Clipchamp and more, and 5 GB of cloud storage. Microsoft 365 Personal, meanwhile, will remain $6.99 per month or $69.99 per year. Microsoft 365 plans. Image Credits: Microsoft Microsoft 365 plans. Image Credits: Microsoft Microsoft 365 Basic compares favorably in terms of pricing to rival Google Workspace, whose Individual plan starts at $9.99 per month for 1 TB of storage, professional support and Google’s standard productivity software (e.g.
$12.50                   $12.50        user/month (Annual subscription–auto renews)1             Originally starting from $22.00 now starting from $22.00                  $22.00                   $22.00        user/month (Annual subscription–auto renews)1             Originally starting from $8.25 now starting from $8.25                  $8.25                   $8.25        user/month (Annual subscription–auto renews)1   Visio: Flowchart software. Different plans available Project: Project management software. Different plans available Microsoft 365 is the productivity cloud designed to help everyone achieve what matters, in their work and life, with best-in-class Microsoft 365 apps, intelligent cloud services, and advanced security. Install Microsoft 365 apps on up to five PCs or Macs, five tablets, and five mobile devices. Hybrid Windows devices, such as the Microsoft Surface Pro, count as either a PC or a tablet. All major credit cards are accepted. When paying with a credit card, your subscription amount will appear on your credit card statement. Existing customers may be eligible to pay by invoice and can contact support to check their eligibility for this payment method. Learn more about paying by invoice. For Microsoft 365 business plans, depending on your choice of service, you'll be billed monthly or annually.
Calvin Fox PRICE-Our loving father (daddy), grandpa, grandpa-great, uncle and friend, Calvin Edgar Fox, age 96, passed away January 18, 2023, with his daughter (Daddy’s little girl) holding his hand.  The last special moment shared between a father and daughter. Calvin was born on August 27, 1926, in Hebron, Illinois to Vivian Mae Peck and Ivan Fox.  He married Ada Wallace the love of his life, on November 25, 1949, in South Miami, Florida.  They had three sons and one daughter (born on Father’s Day) that they loved so very much. He proudly served his country in the US Navy during World War II from 1944-1948, then served ten years in the reserves.  Calvin worked for Utah Power & Light/PacifiCorp at the Carbon Power Plant and later retired from the Hunter Power Plant. Calvin was a man that loved God and Jesus.  A Christian with steadfast faith, even through all his pain and suffering he never faltered.  He was very proud and full of love for his children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren.  He would brag about them every chance he got.  Everyone will miss his hugs and genuine love for everyone.  If you knew him you got his hugs, and he would always leave you with “God bless you, Lord be with you.
He will be extremely missed by his family and a community of friends, many that were adopted as sons or #2 daughters, he loved you. Calvin is survived by his children, Charles (Patsy) Fox, Las Vegas, NV, Janet (Larry) Roberts, Carl (Jamie) Fox, both of Price; stepdaughter, Laurie Hall, Colorado; grandchildren, Chuck (Yukiko) Fox, Casey (Peggy) Fox, Christi Fox and David Bass, Shannon (Todd) Wahlquist, Trevor (Ashley) Roberts, Chuck (Tracy) Roberts, Tyrel (Crystal) Fox, Carley Fox, Tye (Lauren) Gourley, Paige Gourley and Austin, Trina Hiett, John Neputi; 25 great-grandchildren, many nieces and nephews. Preceded in death by his parents, Ivan and Vivian Mae Fox; his wife, Ada Wallace of 44 years, their four-year-old son, Little Ricky; four sisters, Gwen, Marguerite, Doloris and baby sister Betty June; his second wife, Bunny Sherman Fox; third wife, Marilyn Bennett Fox; and great-grandson, Dillon Gordon. Funeral service, Friday, January 27, 2023, 2:00 p.m., at Mitchell Funeral Home (233 East Main Street) in Price where the family will receive friend one hour prior to service.
Trending TV, movie and anime news, plus reviews and analysis. As Zack Snyder’s sci-fi epic Rebel Moon heads to Netflix, here’s everything you need to know from its release date and trailer to cast, plot, and more. Director Zack Snyder is known for his stint in the DCEU, with movies such as Man of Steel, Batman v Superman, and Zack Snyder’s Justice League. Now, after leaving the DCEU behind, Snyder has teamed up with Netflix for an assortment of projects, including Army of the Dead and the forthcoming Rebel Moon.  The movie has already drawn comparisons to that of the Star Wars franchise and is shaping up to be one of 2023’s hottest blockbusters, and a major holiday hit for the streaming platform. So, if you’re like us, you’ll want to be updated with all things Rebel Moon. Here’s everything you need to know.  Rebel Moon will premiere on Netflix on December 22, 2023. The two-part space epic began filming on April 19, 2022, and wrapped on December 2.  Filmed back-to-back, Zack Snyder’s foray into space warfare will also be released in theaters for a limited time. Initially, the early concept for the film was pitched as an Akira Kurosawa-inspired adventure to Star Wars executives during the prequel era, but ultimately transformed into the Netflix space opera we know today.
Zack Snyder’s epic space fantasy Rebel Moon is coming to Netflix this year. From the mind of Zack Snyder comes Rebel Moon — and we’re getting a sneak peek. In an action-packed new teaser that debuted at Netflix’s Tudum: A Global Fan Event, fans finally got a chance to feast their eyes on the visionary auteur’s eagerly awaited new sci-fi fantasy epic. “I thought I knew what a big movie was until I came onto this,” says one of the film’s stars, Ed Skrein, amidst an eye-candy assault of behind-the-scenes footage that includes wild green-screen battles, grueling weapons training and fiery explosions. Front and center in the new featurette are star Sofia Boutella and director Snyder himself, who says that he has been dreaming up the Rebel Moon universe for more than two decades.  The details on the blockbuster are still hush-hush, but here’s what we know: A small peaceful colony on the outskirts of the galaxy is targeted by the insidious Imperium (embodied by a deliciously evil Skrein). But they won’t be facing down the forces of darkness on their own. A team of intrepid warriors will soon come to their aid and turn the tide against the interplanetary interlopers.
Paramount's latest installment in the Scream franchise released in theaters on March 10, and now Scream 6 is available to stream online If you’re looking for a frightfully delightful horror movie, you will want to know where to watch Scream VI, the latest installment in the popular Scream franchise. The film was released in theaters on March 10. Ever since the first movie's release in 1996, the Scream franchise has proven to be a great success among horror fans. The franchise has branched into six films, a television series, and video games. After a break in 2011, the Scream franchise returned to the silver screen in 2022. As of April 2023, the sixth movie has grossed over $169 million at the box office. With new and returning cast members and a new twist on the tale, critics and audiences are already labeling Scream VI as a new re-ignition of the franchise and a frightfully thrilling delight for fans of the horror genre.  Scream VI has joined the rest of the films in the franchise for streaming on Paramount Plus. It was released for streaming on Paramount Plus on April 25. You can also watch the rest of the franchise on Paramount Plus. It is also available to watch on Prime Video with a subscription to the Paramount Plus, or to rent or buy.
63][64] The marketing campaign also included the launch of a website that allowed American users to receive personalized phone calls from Ghostface,[65] Scream-themed meals in different Chain pop-up dinners and an immersive walk-through featuring props and reconstructed sets from the franchise in California;[66] the walk-throughs included appearances by directors and producers Radio Silence, along with actors Mason Gooding, Dermot Mulroney and Tony Revolori.[67][68]  Scream VI was released digitally on April 25, 2023, in the US, where it also began streaming on Paramount+, and various other regions. It was released on VOD on May 9, 2023 in other regions, such as the UK and Ireland.[69] Its DVD, Blu-ray, and Ultra HD Blu-ray released in the US and some regions on July 11, 2023.[70] Upon its release, the film debuted at #1 on the UK Official Film Chart Top 40.[71]  Scream VI grossed $108.2 million in the United States and Canada, and $60.8 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $169 million.[2][3]  In the United States and Canada was projected to gross $35–40 million from 3,675 theaters in its opening weekend.[72] The film made $19.3 million on its first day, including $5.
Altogether, CBO now estimates that actual output was about 1.3 percent less in 2021—but potential output was about 0.2 percent greater—than the agency expected last July. In terms of underlying trends that contribute to growth of real potential GDP over the 2022–2031 period, revisions are very modest, and the average annual growth rate over the period, slightly greater than 1.8 percent, is practically unchanged. In nominal terms, however, the agency’s projections of output and income are higher throughout the projection period because projected inflation over the next several years is above the rates anticipated in July. Nominal GDP is 4.9 percent higher, and national income is 3.9 percent higher, in 2031 than CBO projected last summer. CBO currently projects the unemployment rate to be slightly lower and the labor force participation rate to be slightly higher over the 2022–2031 period than in the agency’s July 2021 forecast. CBO’s current projection of the average unemployment rate over the 2022–2026 period is slightly lower than it was in that earlier forecast—now 3.8 percent, down from 4.0 percent. The current projection of the labor force participation rate is also lower—now 62.1 percent instead of 62.4 percent.
After 2023, in CBO’s projections, tightening monetary policy and several other factors combine to slow the growth of demand, slowing output growth and further reducing inflationary pressures. Under the assumption that current laws governing federal taxes and spending generally remain unchanged, CBO projects that real GDP will grow by 3.1 percent in 2022 (as measured from the fourth quarter of 2021 to the fourth quarter of 2022). That expansion is driven by strong growth in consumer spending and real business investment and by a shrinking U.S. trade deficit (see Table 2-2). The growth of real GDP declines steadily through 2024, led by slower growth in consumer spending and investment, before remaining almost constant through 2026. In the agency’s projections, real GDP grows at an average annual rate of 1.6 percent from the beginning of 2023 through 2026.  Data source: Congressional Budget Office. See www.cbo.gov/publication/57950#data. Real values are nominal values that have been adjusted to remove the effects of changes in prices. Data are annual. Changes are measured from the fourth quarter of one calendar year to the fourth quarter of the next. Data and definitions are based on the national income and products accounts. GDP = gross domestic product; * = between -0.05 percentage points and 0.05 percentage points. a. Business fixed investment and investment in inventories. b.
Despite the uncertainty during the interim period in the wake of Shazam!'s massive success — having received critical praise and earning $365 million worldwide — production for its sequel has wrapped, a trailer debuted and a release date has been set.   Here's everything to know about Shazam! Fury of the Gods.   Shazam! Fury of the Gods wouldn't be possible without the return of its titular character played by Zachary Levi. Plus, his teenage counterpart Billy Batson, played by Asher Angel, will also be making his return.   Other cast members set to reprise their roles include Jack Dylan Grazer, Faithe Herman, Ian Chen, Jovan Armand and Grace Caroline Currey as Billy's foster siblings — while their superhero alter egos will be played by Adam Brody, Meagan Good, Ross Butler and D. J. Cotrona.   New cast members have been recruited to join the sequel as well, including Helen Mirren as Hespera, the daughter of Atlas, alongside Lucy Liu who's cast as her demigod sister, Kalypso. They are the primary villains in Shazam's second installment.   Rachel Zegler, who starred in Steven Spielberg's West Side Story remake, is also cast as their sister in the film, playing the role of Athena, one of three goddess daughters of the Titan Atlas — of which the actress said "was so much fun" to play.
Before being reborn by saying the magic word "Shazam," an acronym of the immortals Solomon, Hercules, Atlas, Zeus, Achilles and Mercury, this muscled do-gooder in spandex was just a kid named Billy Batson, played by Asher Angel. You remember Billy, a constant runaway from the Philadelphia foster homes he's been forced to endure since his teen mom deserted him. Billy's foster bestie is Freddy (the scene-stealing Jack Dylan Grazer), a kid on crutches with a smart mouth on him. Things have changed for Billy and his orphaned buds -- Mary (Grace Caroline Currey), Eugene (Ian Chen), Pedro (Jovan Armand) and Darla (a fab Faithe Herman) -- ever since the Wizard (Djimon Hounsou) picked him as his successor. "Put your hands on my staff," demanded the Wiz. "Gross!" said Billy, in a response that typified the script's "Deadpool"-lite irreverence. I'm pleased to report that cheeky attitude still pops through in "Shazam! Fury of the Gods" as Billy/Shazam and his kid besties, now in adult superhero bodies -- Adam Brody for Freddy, Meagan Good for Darla, Ross Butler for Eugene,  D.J. Cotrona for Pedro and Currey playing both versions of Mary -- take on their greatest challenge yet.
The winners of the FIFA World Cup 2018 will get a staggering sum of USD 42 million. FIFA World Cup Winner 2022: The winners of the FIFA World Cup 2022 would receive a massive prize money of USD 42 million. The Runner Up will get $30 million. The $72 million in prize money, therefore, be cherished by the winners. While the fourth-place team will receive $25 million, the third-place club will receive $27 million, respectively. Ques: Which team has won the FIFA World Cup 2022? Ans. Argentina has won the FIFA World Cup 2022 by defeating France in the Penalty shootout by 4-2, after the match was drawn at 3-3 in the regular time and extra time. Ques: Who won the FIFA World Cup 2022? Ans. Argentina defeated France in the penalty shootout. The Match was drawn at 3-3 after the end of extra time (120 minutes). Argentina won the penalty shootout by 4-2. Ques: Which nation has the most FIFA World Cup victories? Ans: Brazil is the country with the most titles and the only one to have competed in every competition. Brazil won five FIFA World Cup titles. Ques: When will the FIFA World Cup 2022 Final match take place?
110] Due to COVID-19 outbreaks in their squads, Vanuatu and Cook Islands also withdrew because of the travel restrictions.[111][112]  Of the 32 nations qualified to play at the 2022 FIFA World Cup, 24 countries competed at the previous tournament in 2018.[113] Qatar were the only team making their debut in the FIFA World Cup, becoming the first hosts to make their tournament debut since Italy in 1934. As a result, the 2022 tournament was the first World Cup in which none of the teams that earned a spot through qualification were making their debut. The Netherlands, Ecuador, Ghana, Cameroon, and the United States returned to the tournament after missing the 2018 tournament. Canada returned after 36 years, their only prior appearance being in 1986.[114] Wales made their first appearance in 64 years – the longest ever gap for any team, their only previous participation having been in 1958.[115]  Italy, four-time winners and reigning European champions, failed to qualify for a second successive World Cup for the first time in their history, losing in the qualification play-off semi-finals.[116] The Italians were the only former champions and the highest ranked team in the FIFA Men's World Rankings that failed to qualify.
Washington, D.C. — House Energy and Commerce Committee Chair Cathy McMorris Rodgers (R-WA) today announced that TikTok CEO Shou Zi Chew will appear before the committee to testify on TikTok’s consumer privacy and data security practices, the platforms’ impact on kids, and their relationship with the Chinese Communist Party. It will be Chew’s first appearance before a Congressional committee.  “Big Tech has increasingly become a destructive force in American society. The Energy and Commerce Committee has been at the forefront of asking Big Tech CEOs – from Facebook to Twitter to Google – to answer for their companies’ actions. These efforts will continue with TikTok. ByteDance-owned TikTok has knowingly allowed the ability for the Chinese Communist Party to access American user data. Americans deserve to know how these actions impact their privacy and data security, as well as what actions TikTok is taking to keep our kids safe from online and offline harms. We’ve made our concerns clear with TikTok. It is now time to continue the committee’s efforts to hold Big Tech accountable by bringing TikTok before the committee to provide complete and honest answers for people.”  Chew will testify at a full committee hearing of the Energy and Commerce Committee on March 23, 2023. Additional details to follow.  2125 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, D.C.
TikTok CEO Shou Zi Chew will testify for his first congressional hearing on Thursday, where he is likely to face intense grilling from politicians from both parties who argue that the popular app, which has 150 million U.S. users, cannot be trusted. Here’s a quick guide for what to know about Chew, a 40-year-old Singaporean who interned at Facebook and studied at Harvard Business School before becoming the public face of one of the most popular — and contentious — apps in the United States. TikTok's CEO testifies before Congress. Follow our live updates. Chew was born and raised in Singapore, the island nation in Southeast Asia that has become a prominent bridge for international business between China and the West. “The thing about growing up on a small island … is you get wanderlust at a very young age,” he said in an interview last year. After completing his military service — mandatory for most male Singaporeans — he left to study economics at University College London (UCL), a top British university, graduating in 2006 and working at investment bank Goldman Sachs for two years. He then moved to the United States to get his master’s degree at Harvard Business School. “I remember struggling with this decision,” he said in a speech to UCL graduates in 2022, as he was unsure whether taking time to do the master’s degree “would enhance or delay my career.
The tenth and final season of the American crime thriller television series The Blacklist was ordered on February 22, 2022[1][2] and premiered on February 26, 2023, on NBC.[3] The season concluded the series on July 13, 2023 with the final two episodes.[4]  James Spader, Diego Klattenhoff, Hisham Tawfiq, Harry Lennix returned for the season, while Anya Banerjee debuted in a new main role. It is the only season of the series not to star Amir Arison and Laura Sohn after their promotion to main cast, though Arison makes a guest appearance; it is also the second and final season without Megan Boone.[5]  The season is produced by Davis Entertainment, Universal Television and Sony Pictures Television. John Eisendrath, John Davis, Joe Carnahan and John Fox continue to serve as executive producers of the series, while series creator Jon Bokenkamp returned as an executive producer.[6]  On February 22, 2022, James Spader announced the renewal of the series while making his appearance on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon, with the NBC press release coming out shortly after.[28]  On February 1, 2023, NBC officially announced that the season would serve as the last of the series.[2] The same day, the poster and the trailer for the season were released.
The tenth and final season of The Blacklist will head to Netflix in select regions in 2023. by Kasey Moore  kasey__moore  Published on July 21st, 2023, 8:57 am EST The Blacklist – Picture: NBC / Sony Pictures Television The long-running NBC series The Blacklist is a fan favorite with the ninth season now streaming on Netflix in dozens of regions worldwide. The tenth and final season has begun airing on NBC for its final run and will hit Netflix later this year. Here’s what you need to know. Since 2013, The Blacklist is a crime thriller series led by James Spader. Over the years, we’ve seen the former criminal turned FBI informant capture dozens of criminals. The Blacklist was announced to return for a tenth season on NBC back in February 2022. Only later on was it revealed that season 10 would be the final outing for the show and as a result, no season 11 is planned.  Filming got underway on season 10 in September 2022 and cast Anya Banerjee as Siya Malik. It’ll once again be a 22-episode long season with James Spader, Diego Klattenhoff, Hisham Tawfiq, and Harry Lennix returning.
The surreal Nothing, Forever, streaming 24 hours a day, is an eerie experiment in digital creativity Seinfeld went off the air in 1998, but it’s never really gone away – it’s been the subject of modern recreations, dedicated social media accounts and hip-hop/TV fusions. Its latest incarnation, however, is the oddest yet. Nothing, Forever is an endless, AI-generated version of the show that has been streaming on Twitch since mid-December. It tells the “story” – if you can call it that – of four characters, Larry, Fred, Yvonne and Kakler, who look like what would happen if Jerry, George, Elaine and Kramer were sucked into a 1990s computer game. They spend their days discussing their lives and other trivial matters. And it never, ever stops: log on at any hour and there they are, talking about coffee quality or a difficult Monopoly game. The dialogue comes from OpenAI’s GPT-3, a text generator closely related to the ChatGPT service that has recently made waves; another company is responsible for the tech behind the speech itself. On top of that, “we have a lot of proprietary generative algorithms that cause the show to be ‘formed’, so to be speak,” Skyler Hartle of Mismatch Media told Polygon. “We collectively call this logic the ‘director’, as it is largely responsible for making sure all the individual pieces come together into a whole.
The result feels closer to David Lynch than Jerry Seinfeld, with the cast of characters seemingly trapped in AI limbo, always on the verge of setting up a joke, waiting for a punchline that never comes. An eerie, out-of-place laugh track imbues the AI’s clumsy conversations with a slightly sinister undertone. The stream constantly cuts from the Seinfeld apartment to Jerry Seinfeld’s stand-up segments, again, algorithmically generated jokes (and honestly, they’re not that far removed from Jerry Seinfeld’s limp one-liners). As an experiment in AI, it makes for an oddly fascinating watch, but the creators seem to have higher ambitions. Hartle went on to say: “As generative media gets better, we have this notion that at any point, you're gonna be able to turn on the future equivalent of Netflix and watch a show perpetually, nonstop as much as you want. You don't just have seven seasons of a show, you have seven hundred, or infinite seasons of a show that has fresh content whenever you want it. And so that became one of our grounding pillars.” After watching the stream, creatives can likely rest easy that AI isn’t coming for their jobs, yet. The AI is absolutely incapable of writing witticisms, but it is inadvertently hilarious, and sometimes, oddly terrifying.
DES MOINES -- Governor Reynolds signed HF 68 into law today amid hundreds of supporters in the Iowa State Capitol. The Students First Act makes state education funding available for K-12 students who choose to attend private schools.  “Public schools are the foundation of our education system and for most families they will continue to be the option of choice, but they aren’t the only choice,” Governor Reynolds stated. “For some families, a different path may be better for their children. With this bill, every child in Iowa, regardless of zip code or income, will have access to the school best suited for them.”  Universal eligibility will be phased in over three years. All incoming Kindergarteners and all public-school students will be eligible beginning year one with the start of the 2023-2024 school year. Eligibility for families of children currently enrolled in accredited private schools will be income based over the first two years.  Parents or guardians who enroll their eligible children in an accredited private school will receive an amount equal to the per pupil funds allocated by the state to all public school districts each year. The funds are estimated at $7,598 per pupil for the 2023-2024 school year and will be deposited into an education savings account (ESA) to be used for tuition, fees, and other qualified education expenses. The state has issued a request for proposal (RFP) from businesses with experience managing ESA programs.
The Students First Act, introduced by Governor Reynolds and signed into law on Jan. 24, 2023, makes state funding available to support the success of every K-12 student in Iowa. The bill establishes a framework and funding for education savings accounts (ESAs), which may be used by eligible families to cover tuition, fees, and other qualified education expenses at accredited nonpublic schools in Iowa. The State Board of Education adopted administrative rules on May 4, 2023, that specify definitions for the program, eligibility requirements for participation, parameters for the application process, and program administration and accountability. The Students First ESA Application available in English and Spanish. The application window for the 2023-2024 school year runs from 8 a.m. on May 31 through 11:59 p.m. June 30, 2023. Note: Parents/guardians will first be directed to sign up with an email and password. Parents/guardians will receive a message from Odyssey asking them to confirm their email address. After the email is confirmed the parent/guardian can sign in to the Odyssey platform to begin their application.  Parents who choose to enroll their eligible children in an accredited nonpublic school will receive an amount equal to the per pupil funding allocated to public school districts for the same budget school year.
Be the first to find out about GRAMMY nominees, winners, important news, and events. Privacy Policy Graphic: The Recording Academy. news Celebrate ahead of Music's Biggest Night on Feb. 5, 2023, with this spirited playlist of every R&B nominee at the 2023 GRAMMYs. R&B's passion and potency can set a mood instantly. The 2023 GRAMMY nominees embody the genre's effervescence with a unique blend of classic and contemporary sound — and now ​​you can hear all of the nominees in one playlist. Nominated for Best R&B song, Beyoncé's "CUFF IT" electrifies and invigorates the dancefloor, and Mary J. Blige's smooth "Good Morning Gorgeous" supports self-love. Best New Artist nominee Muni Long hits a sweet, sultry spot with "Hrs & Hrs," Jazmine Sullivan poignantly chronicles the confusion of a toxic relationship on "Hurt Me So Good," and PJ Morton's "Please Don't Walk Away" glitters with hope and serenity. For Best R&B Album, nominees include Mary J. Blige's Good Morning Gorgeous (Deluxe), Chris Brown's Breezy (Deluxe), Robert Glasper's Black Radio III, Lucky Daye's Candydrip, and PJ Morton's Watch The Sun. Across the R&B five categories, Mary J.
The Recording Academy  The 65th Grammy Awards was held Sunday, Feb. 5, in Los Angeles, California, at the Crypto.com Arena. The Recording Academy’s CEO/president Harvey Mason, Jr. made opening remarks at the premiere ceremony, following a performance of “I Just Want to Celebrate” with Blind Boys of Alabama, Bob Mintzer, Buddy Guy, La Marisoul from La Santa Cecilia, Maranda Curtis and Shoshana Bean. Most of the winners in the R&B field were called at the premiere ceremony. Legendary producer and songwriter Jimmy Jam presented four R&B categories, including Best R&B Performance, Best Traditional Performance, Best Progressive R&B Album and Best R&B Album. The Best R&B Song category was announced at the main telecast, hosted by Trevor Noah.  Beyoncé, the most-nominated artist this year with nine, took home four trophies, including two in the R&B field.  Below is a list of R&B winners at the 2023 Grammy Awards. A Songwriter(s) Award. A song is eligible if it was first released or if it first achieved prominence during the Eligibility Year. (Artist names appear in parentheses.) Singles or Tracks only. “Cuff It”
Advertisement Supported by The internet giant will grant users access to a chatbot after years of cautious development, chasing splashy debuts from rivals OpenAI and Microsoft. By Nico Grant and Cade Metz Nico Grant and Cade Metz reported this story in San Francisco. For more than three months, Google executives have watched as projects at Microsoft and a San Francisco start-up called OpenAI have stoked the public’s imagination with the potential for artificial intelligence. But on Tuesday, Google tentatively stepped off the sidelines as it released a chatbot called Bard. The new A.I. chatbot will be available to a limited number of users in the United States and Britain and will accommodate additional users, countries and languages over time, Google executives said in an interview. The cautious rollout is the company’s first public effort to address the recent chatbot craze driven by OpenAI and Microsoft, and it is meant to demonstrate that Google is capable of providing similar technology. But Google is taking a much more circumspect approach than its competitors, which have faced criticism that they are proliferating an unpredictable and sometimes untrustworthy technology. Still, the release represents a significant step to stave off a threat to Google’s most lucrative business, its search engine. Many in the tech industry believe that Google — more than any other big tech company — has a lot to lose and to gain from A.I.
From imagining the prime minister leading a cabinet meeting about war to a guide on how best to start your own podcast, Google's LaMDA AI is certainly flexible. By  Tom Acres, technology reporter   Saturday 5 November 2022 19:41, UK The scene is 10 Downing Street, the home of the prime minister. It's a crisp, cool day. A lawn mower can be heard in the distance. There's a knock at the door, and it's answered by a policeman! Now, before anyone gets any ideas, the setup to this particular story is the work of an AI - Google's chatbot named LaMDA, to be precise, which made headlines in the summer when a now ex-engineer claimed it was sentient. Since then, the tech giant has started running a very limited trial to put it through its paces. Sky News got access to the test phase this week, as Google personnel took to the stage in New York to provide an update on their own work with the AI. The presentation included how they were exploring whether LaMDA could generate videos, realistic speech, and even write fiction.                    Is this the future of comedy? The AI acts taking to the stage at the Edinburgh Fringe                                     Tinder tests AI as new way to pick your best photos                                     Legal bills push up costs at Meta but revenues and user numbers up
Midjourney is a generative artificial intelligence program and service created and hosted by San Francisco-based independent research lab Midjourney, Inc. Midjourney generates images from natural language descriptions, called "prompts", similar to OpenAI's DALL-E and Stable Diffusion.[1][2]  The tool is currently in open beta, which it entered on July 12, 2022.[3] The Midjourney team is led by David Holz, who co-founded Leap Motion.[4] Holz told The Register in August 2022 that the company was already profitable.[5] Users create artwork with Midjourney using Discord bot commands.[6]  Midjourney, Inc. was founded in San Francisco, California by David Holz,[7] previously co-founder of Leap Motion.[8] The Midjourney image generation platform first entered open beta on July 12, 2022.[3] However, on March 14, 2022, the Discord server launched with a request to post high-quality photographs to Twitter/Reddit for system's training.  The company has been working on improving its algorithms, releasing new model versions every few months. Version 2 of their algorithm was launched in April 2022[9] and version 3 on July 25.
He ran the company for twelve years, and when he left it employed about 100 people. Midjourney, he said, is pretty small right now. "We're like about 10 people," he explained. "We're self-funded. We have no investors. We're not really financially motivated. We're just sort of here to work on things we're passionate about and have fun. And we were working on a lot of different projects." Holz said the technological aspect of AI and the extent to which it will improve is fairly easy to foresee. "But the human ramifications of that are so hard to imagine," he said. "There's something here that's at the intersection of humanity and technology. In order to really figure out what this is and what it should be, we really need to do a lot of experiments." The unsettled nature of AI image technology is evident in the difference between tools like Midjourney and a downloadable open source graphics application like Blender, or a locally installed commercial application like Adobe Photoshop (before it became a cloud service). Midjourney exists in a social context. Its front-end is the chat service Discord. New users log in to Discord's Midjourney server and can then submit text prompts to generate images alongside numerous other users in any of the various newbie channels. The resulting images for all the users in that channel surface in about a minute, which helps reinforce the notion of community.
Copyright 2023 The Associated Press. All Rights Reserved. Microsoft announced a new version of its search engine Bing is integrating artificial intelligence chat in a step the tech giant hopes will bolster its place in the online search business (Feb. 7) (AP Video: Manuel Valdes) REDMOND, Wash. (AP) — Microsoft is fusing ChatGPT-like technology into its search engine Bing, transforming an internet service that now trails far behind Google into a new way of communicating with artificial intelligence. The revamping of Microsoft’s second-place search engine could give the software giant a head start against other tech companies in capitalizing on the worldwide excitement surrounding ChatGPT, a tool that’s awakened millions of people to the possibilities of the latest AI technology.  Along with adding it to Bing, Microsoft is also integrating the chatbot technology into its Edge browser. Microsoft announced the new technology at an event Tuesday at its headquarters in Redmond, Washington. “Think of it as faster, more accurate, more powerful” than ChatGPT, built with technology from ChatGPT-maker OpenAI but tuned for search queries, said Yusuf Mehdi, a Microsoft executive who leads its consumer division, in an interview. A public preview of the new Bing launched Tuesday for desktop users who sign up for it, but Mehdi said the technology will scale to millions of users in coming weeks and will eventually come to the smartphone apps for Bing and Edge.
Microsoft Bing (commonly known as Bing) is a web search engine owned and operated by Microsoft. The service has its origins in Microsoft's previous search engines: MSN Search, Windows Live Search and later Live Search. Bing provides a variety of search services, including web, video, image and map search products. It is developed using ASP.NET.  Bing, Microsoft's replacement for Live Search, was unveiled by Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer on May 28, 2009, at the All Things Digital conference in San Diego, California, for release on June 3, 2009.[2] Notable new features at the time included the listing of search suggestions while queries are entered and a list of related searches (called "Explore pane") based on semantic technology from Powerset,[3] which Microsoft had acquired in 2008.[4]  In July 2009, Microsoft and Yahoo! announced a deal in which Bing would power Yahoo! Search.[5] Yahoo! finished the transition in 2012.[6]  In October 2011, Microsoft stated that they were working on new back-end search infrastructure with the goal of delivering faster and slightly more relevant search results for users. Known as "Tiger", the new index-serving technology had been incorporated into Bing globally since August that year.
SAN FRANCISCO--(BUSINESS WIRE)-- Pinterest, Inc. (NYSE: PINS) today announced that co-founder, Chief Executive Officer and President, Ben Silbermann will transition to the newly created role of Executive Chairman, and online commerce expert Bill Ready will become Chief Executive Officer and a member of the Board of Directors, effective June 29, 2022.   Ready is joining Pinterest from Google, where he served as President of Commerce, Payments & Next Billion Users and oversaw Google’s vision, strategy and the delivery of its commerce products. Prior to Google, Ready served in various senior leadership roles at PayPal, including Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer.   With over 400 million monthly active users, Pinterest has built a healthy advertising business that generated strong cash flow and doubled revenue during the pandemic. In addition, Pinterest has been laser-focused on putting Pinners first, continuously improving its roadmap, investing in creators, shopping and scaling internationally.   “Building Pinterest with such a wildly talented, kind and creative team has been the gift of a lifetime,” said Silbermann. “Today, Pinterest inspires hundreds of millions of people with ideas for every aspect of their lives. We’ve built a growing global business that puts the well-being of our users at the core of everything we do. And we’re just getting started.”
The co-founder will stick around as Pinterest’s first executive chairman. Curiously, PayPal was reportedly looking into buying Pinterest back in October 2021. Days later, the payments firm squashed the “rumor” in a note to investors, saying it was “not pursuing an acquisition” at that time.
Connor Christie                   Published: May 5, 2023  The tides have finally turned, and the sun will shine again on Pikmin fans worldwide. Before the September 2022 Nintendo Direct, Nintendo hadn’t shared anything about the Pikmin 4 release date since 2017. But after Miyamoto spoke about Pikmin Bloom during the livestream, he finally revealed we can get our hands on the next game in the series this year.   While you wait for Pikmin 4, head on over to our list of the best Switch RPGs to find something you can play right now, or take a look at our list of the best new Switch games coming in 2023 to find out what else you should be looking forward to.    The Pikmin 4 release date is Friday, July 21, 2023, for the Nintendo Switch. We can’t wait to join Olimar and his friends again soon! Follow the link below to pre-order a copy.    Of course, there is, you can take a look at all of the adorable gameplay from the Nintendo Direct February 2023 below. We also recommend you head over to the Nintendo YouTube account to find even more gameplay and Pikmin 4 fun.    Pikmin 4 gameplay looks very similar to previous games in the series but with an adorable chunky dog named Otachi.
This fourth entry has been a long time coming, with Shigeru Miyamoto saying back in 2015 that it was “very close to completion.” Seven years later, it’s finally set to release in July. This installment introduces a new Ice Pikmin that can freeze enemies and the environment to help your alien flora navigate the strange planet they find themselves on. The plants aren’t alone this time around, either, as they get help from a rotund dog called Oatchi, who can smash through barriers and carry Pikmin on its back while swimming across ponds and puddles. Overall, it looks like good fun for fans of the series or anyone interested in picking up a colorful, cartoonish strategy game. Check out our Pikmin 4 review for more details. Chris Reed is a deals expert and commerce editor for IGN. You can follow him on Twitter @_chrislreed or on Mastodon @chrislreed.
NPR's Sacha Pfeiffer talks to Wall Street Journal reporter Sam Schechner about the layoffs which will cut about 12% of Meta's workforce. This round follows a previous cut of 11,000 jobs. SACHA PFEIFFER, HOST:  Meta is planning a second round of layoffs. That's the parent company of Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp. And it announced yesterday it will cut another 10,000 jobs. This follows 11,000 layoffs at Meta last November. CEO Mark Zuckerberg has said that 2023 will be Meta's, quote, "year of efficiency." He also says it will be, in his words, stronger and more nimble. We're joined now by Wall Street Journal technology reporter Sam Schechner. Sam, thanks for coming on.SAM SCHECHNER: A pleasure to be here.PFEIFFER: These are a lot of layoffs, but I want to make sure we put it in the overall context of how large Meta is. So tell us, how many employees does it have now? How many will it have left once the layoffs are done?SCHECHNER: Well, those are good questions. We know the numerator. We don't necessarily know the denominator. At the end of the year, Meta had roughly 86,000 employees. Most of those who are being laid off - the 11,000 from last fall - were still on the payroll, the company said.
CEO Mark Zuckerberg attributed the cuts to overhiring during the pandemic. In a letter to staff posted to the corporate website, he cited a decline in e-commerce, the wider economic downturn, increased competition, and a decline in ad sales–the primary way the company makes money.   "I got this wrong, and I take responsibility for that," he wrote.  The layoffs come as the company has invested billions in the so-called metaverse, pitched as a virtual-reality future in which people will work, mingle, exercise and go to concerts. But it's an unproven bet on the future, and not all everyone is convinced it should be the social media company's focus.                   Meta CEO Mark Zuckerberg made big investments in the "metaverse," which he showed off during a virtual event last year. Last week, Zuckerberg announced the company was laying off 13% of its staff.                                                           Eric Risberg/AP                                       hide caption  Meta CEO Mark Zuckerberg made big investments in the "metaverse," which he showed off during a virtual event last year. Last week, Zuckerberg announced the company was laying off 13% of its staff. Zuckerberg said the workforce cuts would affect the whole organization, with recruiting staff disproportionately affected due to fewer hires anticipated in the coming year. A hiring freeze through the first quarter of 2023 will continue.
“Since we started iRobot, our team has been on a mission to create innovative, practical products that make customers’ lives easier, leading to inventions like the Roomba and iRobot OS,” said Colin Angle, chairman and CEO of iRobot. “Amazon shares our passion for building thoughtful innovations that empower people to do more at home, and I cannot think of a better place for our team to continue our mission. I’m hugely excited to be a part of Amazon and to see what we can build together for customers in the years ahead.” Amazon will acquire iRobot for $61 per share in an all-cash transaction valued at approximately $1.7 billion, including iRobot’s net debt. Completion of the transaction is subject to customary closing conditions, including approval by iRobot’s shareholders and regulatory approvals. On completion, Colin Angle will remain as CEO of iRobot.  About Amazon  Amazon is guided by four principles: customer obsession rather than competitor focus, passion for invention, commitment to operational excellence, and long-term thinking. Amazon strives to be Earth’s Most Customer-Centric Company, Earth’s Best Employer, and Earth’s Safest Place to Work. Customer reviews, 1-Click shopping, personalized recommendations, Prime, Fulfillment by Amazon, AWS, Kindle Direct Publishing, Kindle, Career Choice, Fire tablets, Fire TV, Amazon Echo, Alexa, Just Walk Out technology, Amazon Studios, and The Climate Pledge are some of the things pioneered by Amazon.
Information regarding iRobot's directors and executive officers, including a description of their direct interests, by security holdings or otherwise, is contained in iRobot's proxy statement for its 2022 annual meeting of stockholders, which was filed with the SEC on April 11, 2022, and will be included in the Proxy Statement (when available). iRobot stockholders may obtain additional information regarding the direct and indirect interests of the participants in the solicitation of proxies in connection with the proposed transaction, including the interests of iRobot directors and executive officers in the transaction, which may be different than those of iRobot stockholders generally, by reading the Proxy Statement and any other relevant documents that are filed or will be filed with the SEC relating to the transaction. You may obtain free copies of these documents using the sources indicated above. SOURCE iRobot Corporation More news releases in similar topics Sign up to get PRN’s top stories and curated news delivered to your inbox weekly!  Cision Distribution 888-776-0942 from 8 AM - 9 PM ET
Super Bowl LVII was an American football game played to determine the champion of the National Football League (NFL) for the 2022 season. The American Football Conference (AFC) champion Kansas City Chiefs  defeated the National Football Conference (NFC) champion Philadelphia Eagles, 38–35. The game was played on February 12, 2023, at State Farm Stadium in Glendale, Arizona. It was the fourth Super Bowl hosted by the Phoenix metropolitan area, and the third at this venue, with the most recent previously being Super Bowl XLIX in 2015 (then known as University of Phoenix Stadium).[6]  Both teams finished the regular season with a league-best 14–3 record. This was the Eagles fourth Super Bowl appearance overall and the second in the last six seasons, having previously won Super Bowl LII; the Eagles previously lost Super Bowls XV and XXXIX. This was the Chiefs' fifth Super Bowl appearance overall and third in the last four seasons, having previously won Super Bowls IV and LIV, and losses in Super Bowls I and LV.  After the Eagles went into halftime up 24–14, the Chiefs mounted a comeback to win the game 38–35 with a game-winning field goal kicked by Harrison Butker. Butker's game winning kick was set up by a pivotal and controversial defensive holding call on Philadelphia cornerback James Bradberry, which was criticized by some observers but supported by others.
Official Super Bowl LVIII Ticket Packages Secure official access to Super Bowl LVIII with the Official Hospitality Partner of the NFL – On Location. With the best selection of seating options at Allegiant Stadium, exclusive experiences before and after the game and other fantastic benefits, On Location is the only place for Super Bowl LVIII ticket packages. Secure yours today. Schein: Super Bowl LVII takeaways Official Super Bowl LVII Digital Program There's being there, and then there's being On Location. Watch Rihanna return to the stage in the Apple Music Super Bowl LVII Halftime Show.      © 2023 NFL Enterprises LLC. NFL and the NFL shield design are registered trademarks of the National Football League.The team names, logos and uniform designs are registered trademarks of the teams indicated. All other NFL-related trademarks are trademarks of the National Football League. NFL footage © NFL Productions LLC.
Concert revenue grew tenfold for the NCT Dream and Red Velvet label, while recorded music sales declined 3.7%.  													By 												  	Glenn Peoples   	SM Entertainment’s revenue in 2022 grew 18.7% to 848.3 billion won ($657 million at the average 2022 exchange rate) in 2022, the Korean music company announced Monday. Gross profits rose 15.4% to 297.5 billion won ($230 million), operating profit fell 3.7% to 93.9 billion won ($73 million) and operating margin dropped from 13.6% to 11.1%.   	The K-pop company’s roster includes NCT Dream, NCT 127, Aespa and Red Velvet. NCT Dream had the fourth most album sales of any artist in Korea in 2022 with 4.1 million units. Red Velvet was the No. 9 artist with 2.4 million units, NCT 127 was No. 11 with 2.2 million units and Aespa was No. 13 with 1.8 million units.       	 	 		 					Related		 	                    	 	 		 					The Big Bang Theory: HYBE's Chairman on K-Pop's Future, The BTS Model, AI Plans and More		 	    	02/22/2023
South Korea-based entertainment giant SM Entertainment generated revenues of 238.1 billion South Korea Won (USD $179.4m) in Q3 2022 (the three months to end of September). That’s according to investor filings published by the firm on Monday (November 14). That $179.4 million revenue haul represents growth of 65.4% YoY. SM’s roster includes K-Pop stars like SUPER JUNIOR, Girls’ Generation, SHINee, EXO, Red Velvet, KANGTA, BoA, TVXQ!, NCT and aespa. SM’s operating profit in Q3 was 29.8 billion South Korea Won ($22.4m), up 201.4% YoY, from 9.9 billion South Korea Won ($7.4m) in Q3 2021. The company’s net profit reached 29.2 billion won ($22.1 million) in Q3. Digging deeper into the filling reveals that SM’s ‘Album/ Digital music’ segment was the company’s biggest revenue driver in Q3, generating 72 billion South Korea Won ($54.3m) across the quarter. That revenue figure represented YoY growth of 14.5% versus 66.8 billion South Korea Won ($50.4m) in Q3 2021 (see below).
llama.CausalSelfAttention = LoRACausalSelfAttention      yield      llama.CausalSelfAttention = causal_self_attention      LoRACausalSelfAttention.lora_config = None       llama.CausalSelfAttention = LoRACausalSelfAttention      yield      llama.CausalSelfAttention = causal_self_attention      LoRACausalSelfAttention.lora_config = None       yield      llama.CausalSelfAttention = causal_self_attention      LoRACausalSelfAttention.lora_config = None       llama.CausalSelfAttention = causal_self_attention      LoRACausalSelfAttention.lora_config = None       LoRACausalSelfAttention.lora_config = None   We are now ready to fine-tune LLaMA. You can fine-tune Lit-LLaMA on the Alpaca dataset using LoRA and quantization on a consumer GPU. Lit-LLaMA comes with a simple script for downloading and preparing the Alpaca dataset, which you can find here. Note: You can convert the official Meta AI LLaMA weights to Lit-LLaMA format using the instructions here. Follow these two simple steps to instruction-tune LLaMA: Find the full fine-tuning code here. To generate text predictions, you will need trained model weights. You can use either the official Meta AI weights or the model that you have fine-tuned.
Advancing health one insight at a time n a trip to Capitol Reef National Park with my son, I wanted to try something different, something exciting, something I’d never done before.  So we went on a two-hour llama hike.  When Andrew, the guide, arrived with the 350-pound animals, the first thing I thought was how we were supposed to trust these animals not to trample us. But Andrew explained how to walk the llamas and we began our hike. Right away, I noticed that my son’s llama was more responsive and much calmer than mine. My llama was less experienced. He was making sounds and being obnoxious. He wasn't responding to me. Andrew took over and taught me to be a little more forceful. He told me to adjust to my llama’s personality.  As we continued to walk, my son’s llama suddenly became distraught and began making a scary sound. The llama was trying to warn us that there were cows around. But even though the llama was worried, at no point was my son in danger. No matter how upset the llama was, he was following my nine-year-old, who was so much smaller than the llama.  And that’s when I began to wonder, how do you train these big animals to be so reliable? How does everyone—according to the llama outfitter’s Google reviews—have such a great experience?
On the morning of the ceremony, however, it was reported that Gaga would perform at the ceremony.[36] Meanwhile, actress Glenn Close, who was originally scheduled as a presenter during the gala, canceled her appearance due to a positive COVID-19 test.[37]  When the nominations were announced, nine of the ten films nominated for Best Picture had earned a combined gross of $1.57 billion at the American and Canadian box offices at the time. Top Gun: Maverick was the highest-grossing film among the Best Picture nominees with $718.7 million in domestic box office receipts.[38] Avatar: The Way of Water came in second with $598.4 million; this was followed by Elvis ($151 million), Everything Everywhere All at Once ($70 million), The Fabelmans ($15 million), The Banshees of Inisherin ($9 million), Tar ($5.6 million), Triangle of Sadness ($4.2 million), and Women Talking ($1.1 million). The box office figures for All Quiet on the Western Front were unavailable due to their distributor Netflix's policy of refusing to release such figures.[39] Furthermore, by virtue of Avatar: The Way of Water and Top Gun: Maverick's Best Picture nominations, it marked the first time since the 55th ceremony in 1983 that the two highest grossing films of the year were both nominated in the aforementioned category.[40]
His win, among the most expected of the night, was nevertheless one of the ceremony’s most moving moments. The audience — including his “Temple of Doom” director, Steven Spielberg — gave Quan a standing ovation as he fought back tears.  “Mom, I just won an Oscar!” said Quan, 51, whose family fled Vietnam in the war when he was a child.  “They say stories like this only happen in the movies. I can’t believe it’s happening,” said Quan. “This is the American dream.”  Minutes later, Quan’s castmate Jamie Lee Curtis won for best supporting actress. Her win, in one of the most competitive categories this year, denied a victory for comic-book fans. Angela Bassett (“Black Panther: Wakanda Forever”) would have been the first performer to win an Oscar for a Marvel movie. Curtis is the rare Oscar winner whose parents were both Oscar nominees: Tony Curtis was nominated for “The Defiant Ones” in 1959 and Janet Leigh was nominated in 1961 for “Psycho.”  The German-language WWI epic “All Quiet on the Western Front” — Netflix’s top contender this year — took four awards as the academy heaped honors on the craft of the harrowing anti-war film. It won for cinematography, production design, score and best international film. Though Bassett missed on supporting actress, Ruth E.
Advertisement Supported by The list of winners for the 95th Academy Awards. By Gabe Cohn The 95th Academy Awards were held Sunday night at the Dolby Theater in Los Angeles. “Everything Everywhere All at Once,” the proudly weird sci-fi movie from Daniel Kwan and Daniel Scheinert, swept most of the top categories, including best picture and directing. Michelle Yeoh, that movie’s star, won the best actress award, becoming the first Asian actress ever to win that honor. The other lead acting prize went to Brendan Fraser (“The Whale”), also a first-time winner. (Perhaps the biggest winner of all: A24, the studio behind both of those movies.) Earlier victories went to “Guillermo del Toro’s Pinocchio,” which won for best animated feature; Ke Huy Quan and Jamie Lee Curtis, each first-time winners for supporting roles in “Everything Everywhere All at Once”; “Navalny,” which picked up the best documentary feature statuette; the costume designer Ruth E. Carter, who became the first Black woman to have won two Oscars (this time for “Black Panther: Wakanda Forever”); “All Quiet on the Western Front,” which won several awards in the first half of the show, including for best international feature, production design and cinematography; and Sarah Polley, who won the best adapted screenplay honor for “Women Talking.” See below for a full list of winners.
11] Michelle Yeoh was the first Asian winner for Best Actress and the second woman of color overall after Halle Berry, who won for her performance in 2001's Monster's Ball.[12] Furthermore, she was the first woman to identify as Asian to be nominated in that category.[b] Ke Huy Quan became the first Vietnamese person to win an Oscar and the second Asian winner for Best Supporting Actor after Haing S. Ngor, who won for his role in 1984's The Killing Fields.[14][15] The 42-year span between Judd Hirsch's first nomination, for his supporting role in 1980's Ordinary People, and his second, for The Fabelmans, set the record for the longest gap between Oscar nominations.[11] At age 90, Best Original Score nominee John Williams became the oldest person nominated competitively in Oscars history.[11] Best Costume Design winner Ruth E. Carter was the first Black woman to win two Oscars.[16]  Winners are listed first, highlighted in boldface, and indicated with a double dagger (‡).[17]  The Academy held its 13th annual Governors Awards ceremony on November 19, 2022, during which the following awards were presented:[18]  The following presented awards and performed musical numbers.[21]  In September 2022, the Academy hired television producers Glenn Weiss and Ricky Kirshner to oversee production of the 2023 ceremony.
One of the things I realized growing up is that one of the best things we can do for each other is shelter each other from the chaos of this crazy world. Thank you to the storytellers here who did that for me.” Other nominees in the category included “All Quiet on the Western Front,” “Avatar: The Way of Water,” “The Banshees of Inisherin,” “Elvis,” “The Fabelmans,” “Tár,” “Top Gun: Maverick,” “Triangle of Sadness” and “Women Talking.” Brendan Fraser won the Academy Award for best actor for his performance in "The Whale." Fraser, appearing visibly shocked and emotional upon accepting his trophy, began by thanking the film's director Darren Aronofsky for throwing him "a creative lifetime and hauling me aboard the good ship 'The Whale.'" Reflecting on his journey in the entertainment industry, which started 30 years ago, he added, "Things -- they didn't come easily to me, but there was a facility that I didn't appreciate at the time until it stopped." Other actors nominated in the category included Austin Butler for his performance in "Elvis," Colin Farrell for his performance in "The Banshees of Inisherin," Paul Mescal for his performance in "Aftersun" and Bill Nighy for his performance in "Living." All were first-time Oscar nominees.
___ Of the 20 actors up for the biggest individual prizes in their fields Sunday night — best actor, best actress, best supporting actor, best supporting actress — 16 are first-time nominees, which host Jimmy Kimmel called out in his monologue after parachuting in. Cate Blanchett (“Tár”) is the only acting nominee to have won (twice). One of her fellow best actress nominees, Michelle Williams (“The Fabelmans,”) is now a five-time Oscar nominee but is still seeking her first win. The other two non-first-time nominees on the list have waited a long time for today. Angela Bassett (“Black Panther: Wakanda Forever”) is now a two-time nominee, after being up for best actress following her portrayal of Tina Turner in “What’s Love Got to do With It” at the awards in 1994. And Judd Hirsch (“The Fabelmans”) got his only previous nomination in 1980, for his work in “Ordinary People” — when he lost to one of his co-stars in that film, Timothy Hutton. ___ The telecast opened with a montage from the nominees, before cutting to Jimmy Kimmel in the cockpit of a fighter jet flown by “Top Gun: Maverick” star Tom Cruise. Cruise demanded Kimmel eject in the video before the camera cut to the exterior of the Dolby, over which two jets flew over.
11] Michelle Yeoh was the first Asian winner for Best Actress and the second woman of color overall after Halle Berry, who won for her performance in 2001's Monster's Ball.[12] Furthermore, she was the first woman to identify as Asian to be nominated in that category.[b] Ke Huy Quan became the first Vietnamese person to win an Oscar and the second Asian winner for Best Supporting Actor after Haing S. Ngor, who won for his role in 1984's The Killing Fields.[14][15] The 42-year span between Judd Hirsch's first nomination, for his supporting role in 1980's Ordinary People, and his second, for The Fabelmans, set the record for the longest gap between Oscar nominations.[11] At age 90, Best Original Score nominee John Williams became the oldest person nominated competitively in Oscars history.[11] Best Costume Design winner Ruth E. Carter was the first Black woman to win two Oscars.[16]  Winners are listed first, highlighted in boldface, and indicated with a double dagger (‡).[17]  The Academy held its 13th annual Governors Awards ceremony on November 19, 2022, during which the following awards were presented:[18]  The following presented awards and performed musical numbers.[21]  In September 2022, the Academy hired television producers Glenn Weiss and Ricky Kirshner to oversee production of the 2023 ceremony.
A photo of Angela Lansbury is displayed during the In Memoriam Oscars tribute at the 95th Academy Awards, in Los Angeles, California, March 12, 2023. Photo by Carlos Barria/REUTERS ___ After five performances, the Oscar for original song is finally announced: “Naatu Naatu” from “RRR.” The song from the Telugu-language film was performed by playback singers Kaala Bhairava and Rahul Sipligunj and a phalanx of dancers earlier in the night. “RRR has to win, pride of every Indian … and has put me at the top of the world,” M.M. Keeravani sang to the tune of The Carpenters’ “Top of the World” while accepting the award alongside Chandrabose. ___ Daniel Scheinert thanked a long list of his former teachers. Daniel Kwan revealed that he still deals to confidence issues. They’re Oscar winners now, after taking home the original screenplay award for “Everything Everywhere All at Once.” Daniel Kwan and Daniel Scheinert win the Oscar for Best Original Screenplay for “Everything Everywhere All at Once” during the Oscars show at the 95th Academy Awards in Hollywood, Los Angeles, California, March 12, 2023. Photo by Carlos Barria/REUTERS “I never thought I was good enough. I have self-esteem problems,” Kwan said. The adapted screenplay award went to Sarah Polley for “Women Talking.
Fisher     ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT  Screenplay - Edward Berger, Lesley Paterson & Ian Stokell   GLASS ONION: A KNIVES OUT MYSTERY  Written by Rian Johnson   LIVING  Written by Kazuo Ishiguro   TOP GUN: MAVERICK  Screenplay by Ehren Kruger and Eric Warren Singer and Christopher McQuarrie; Story by Peter Craig and Justin Marks   WOMEN TALKING - **WINNER**  Screenplay by Sarah Polley     THE BANSHEES OF INISHERIN  Written by Martin McDonagh   EVERYTHING EVERYWHERE ALL AT ONCE - **WINNER**  Written by Daniel Kwan & Daniel Scheinert   THE FABELMANS  Written by Steven Spielberg & Tony Kushner   TÁR  Written by Todd Field   TRIANGLE OF SADNESS  Written by Ruben Östlund       The 95th Oscars will be held on Sunday, March 12, 2023, at the Dolby® Theatre at Ovation Hollywood and will be televised live on ABC and in more than 200 territories worldwide.
This is a list of submissions to the 95th Academy Awards for the Best International Feature Film. The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS) has invited the film industries of various countries to submit their best film for the Academy Award for Best International Feature Film every year since the award was created in 1956.[1] The award is presented annually by the Academy to a feature-length motion picture produced outside the United States that contains primarily non-English dialogue.[1][2] The International Feature Film Award Committee oversees the process and reviews all the submitted films.[2] The category was previously called the Best Foreign Language Film, but this was changed in April 2019 to Best International Feature Film, after the Academy deemed the word "Foreign" to be outdated.[3]  For the 95th Academy Awards, the submitted motion pictures must be first released theatrically in their respective countries between 1 January 2022 and 30 November 2022. The deadline for submissions to the Academy was 3 October 2022,[4] and 93 countries submitted a film.[5] Uganda submitted a film for the first time, and Tanzania made a submission for the first time since 2001.[6][7]  After the 15-film shortlist was announced on December 21, 2022, the five nominees were announced on January 24, 2023.
YouTube has announced that it’s raising the price of its YouTube TV subscription to $72.99 per month. The new monthly price is an $8 increase from the current $64.99 monthly fee. New members will see the new price starting today, while existing members will see the price change starting on April 18. The Google-owned company blames a rise in “content costs” for the change. To soften the blow, the company announced that it’s lowering the price of its 4K Plus add-on from $19.99 per month to $9.99 per month. “As content costs have risen and we continue to invest in our quality of service, we’ll be adjusting our monthly cost, after 3 years, from $64.99/mo to $72.99/mo, in order to bring you the best possible TV service,” the company said in a tweet. An update for our members. As content costs have risen and we continue to invest in our quality of service, we’ll be adjusting our monthly cost, after 3 years, from $64.99/mo to $72.99/mo, in order to bring you the best possible TV service. — YouTube TV (@YouTubeTV) March 16, 2023  YouTube TV notes that this is its first price increase in three years. In July 2020, the price for YouTube TV increased from $49 to $64.99.
If you're not sure if YouTube TV is for you, we suggest checking out our review on fuboTV, our number one pick for live TV streaming services.  Need more robust internet for streaming? Take a peek at our top-ranked providers. Not interested in streaming live TV? Check out our top-ranked TV providers. YouTube TV is $73 per month for 100+ channels, including Disney Channel, ESPN, HGTV, Nickelodeon, and MSNBC. YouTube TV recently added a Spanish plan for $25 per month for six months, then $34 per month with 28+ Spanish-language channels.  About Us Contact Us Press Awards Our Methodology Phone Plans TV Service Internet Service Home Security VPN Best Home Security Systems Best Internet Service Providers Best TV Service Providers Best Cell Phone Plans Viasat Review Spectrum Internet Review 2021 Xfinity Internet Review DIRECTV Review Vivint Smart Home Security Review Stay updated on the latest products and services anytime, anywhere. Terms of Use | Privacy Policy | Site Map |  Disclaimer: The information featured in this article is based on our best estimates of pricing, package details, contract stipulations, and service available at the time of writing. This is not a guarantee. All information is subject to change. Pricing will vary based on various factors, including, but not limited to, the customer’s location, package chosen, added features and equipment, the purchaser’s credit score, etc. For the most accurate information, please ask your customer service representative.
Create a free profile to get unlimited access to exclusive show news, updates, and more! The results are in! It's been such a talent-packed season of The Voice, but unfortunately, it's come to an end. The Season 23 finale of The Voice was Tuesday, May 23. It's then where we found out who took home the prize — and secured their place in Voice history. In addition to Blake Shelton's final appearance and some star-studded performances, the finale episode gave us the results we have all be waiting for. Would Shelton add to his record with a 10th win as a Voice Coach? Would Niall Horan or Chance the Rapper take home a win in their first season? Or would Kelly Clarkson add to her collection of Voice wins?   Watch The Voice on NBC and Peacock. So, who actually did win? Read on for the results.  The winner of The Voice Season 23 was announced during the finale on Tuesday, May 23. Coming in second place was Grace West, followed by D.Smooth in third, Sorelle in fourth, and NOIVAS in fifth.  During the May 15 Live Show, Grace West (Team Blake), D. Smooth (Team Kelly), Gina Miles (Team Niall), Sorelle (Team Chance), and NOIVAS (Team Blake) were all voted to advance to the finale.
GoldDerby The all-important live shows for “The Voice” Season 23 are scheduled to begin a little later than usual this year, on May 15, 2023. That’s when the power officially shifts from the four coaches (Blake Shelton, Kelly Clarkson, Chance the Rapper and Niall Horan) to the viewers at home. Prior to that, the coaches helped narrow down their teams in the blind auditions, battles, knockouts and playoffs. Of the remaining artists, who do YOU think will ultimately join the winners list for this Spring 2023 cycle on NBC? Each week, America will vote for their favorite contestants, with the highest vote-getters advancing to the next round. The singers who receive the lowest number of votes will be eliminated from the competition. Scroll through our gallery below to see photos, song lists and bios for all of “The Voice” Season 23 finalists who made it to the playoffs. Team Niall Horan Age: 18 Hometown: Paxton, IL Resident: Sacramento, CA Blind Audition Song: “The One That Got Away” Battle Song: “Skinny Love” Knockout Song: “Somebody That I Used to Know” Playoff Song: “Wicked Game” Semi-Finals Song: “All I Want” Finals Song (Up-Tempo): “Style”
Cocks to Succeed Interim CEO & Board Member, Rich Stoddart, and Join Board of Directors; Stoddart to Become Chair of the Board   Eric Nyman Appointed President & Chief Operating Officer of Hasbro   PAWTUCKET, R.I.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Jan. 5, 2022-- Hasbro, Inc. (NASDAQ: HAS) today announced that its Board of Directors has appointed Chris Cocks as Chief Executive Officer and member of the Board of Directors, effective February 25, 2022. Mr. Cocks currently serves as President and Chief Operating Officer of Hasbro’s Wizards of the Coast and Digital Gaming division, a global leader in tabletop and digital gaming. He will succeed Interim CEO, Rich Stoddart, who was appointed following the October passing of Hasbro’s longtime CEO Brian Goldner. Mr. Stoddart, who has served as a Hasbro independent director since 2014, will become Chair of the Board, effective February 25, 2022.   Tracy Leinbach, current Chair of the Board, said: “Chris’s appointment marks the culmination of an extensive and thoughtful candidate review and selection process led by the Board. In Chris, we have chosen a leader uniquely positioned to execute and evolve Hasbro’s Brand Blueprint strategy while continuing to generate growth and deliver strong shareholder returns.
Chris’s extensive omni-channel experience and proven track record make him the ideal leader for Hasbro as it continues to become the world’s leading play and entertainment company. On behalf of the Board, we thank Rich for serving as Interim CEO during a difficult time for the Hasbro family and are delighted he will serve as Chair of our Board.”   Mr. Stoddart said: “Having known Chris for years and working more closely with him these last several months, I have no doubt that he will be an extraordinary leader for the next phase of Hasbro’s journey. A storyteller and gamer at heart, Chris innately understands how to create and nurture brands to drive fan and consumer connection across channels. He is a highly strategic leader, with the vision, skills and experience to unlock our Brand Blueprint for supercharged growth.”   Mr. Cocks said: “Hasbro has amazing brands, gifted storytellers and unique entertainment assets, and I am humbled to step into the position of CEO at this important time and to build on the strong foundation Brian created. Our consumer products, gaming and entertainment teams are the best and most creative in the business and have shown such incredible resilience. I look forward to working with our highly-experienced senior management team as we continue to reimagine play and entertainment and deliver experiences to families and fans, of all ages, around the world.”   Mr.
By Brandon Costa, Director of Digital Tuesday, April 11, 2023 - 12:29 pm                                      Print This Story  | Subscribe  The National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences (NATAS) announced the nominees for the 44th Annual Sports Emmy Awards on Tuesday. The 44th Annual Sports Emmy Awards ceremony will take place at Jazz at Lincoln Center’s Frederick P. Rose Hall on Monday, May 22, 2023. ESPN led all network groups with 59 total nominations, while NBC Sports also pulled in an impressive 38 nods. FOX Sports also received 33 selections and CBS Sports (29), Turner Sports (26), NFL Network (15), and HBO (10) all registered double-digit nomination totals. Among the leaders by program, NBC Sports’ coverage of the Beijing Winter Olympics and NFL 360 from NFL Network received 10 nominations, while Turner Sports’ coverage of the 2022 NCAA Men’s Basketball Tournament pulled in eight and FOX Sports’ coverage of the 2022 FIFA World Cup netted seven. The National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences (NATAS) will announce the winners at an in-person ceremony at Jazz at Lincoln Center’s Frederick P. Rose Hall on May 22. “Today we honor these esteemed nominees and celebrate those who bring the thrill of competitive sports into our lives on a daily basis,” Adam Sharp, President & CEO, NATAS said in the official nominations announcement.
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASETuesday, April 11th, 2023 XXIV Olympic Winter Games Earn 10 Nominations, Tied for Most of Any Program Sunday Night Football Nominated for Outstanding Live Sports Series; Up For 12th Win in 15 Years 148th Kentucky Derby and 2022 Winter Olympic Games Nominated for Outstanding Live Sports Special Peacock Earns Six Nominations, Including Woooooo! Becoming Ric Flair (Outstanding Long Documentary) and Meddling (Outstanding Documentary Series) Mike Tirico Nominated in Host and Play-by-Play Categories, Joined by SNF Colleagues Cris Collinsworth and Melissa Stark  Telemundo’s Andrés Cantor, Rolando Cantú, and Miguel Gurwitz Earn Sports Personality Nominations STAMFORD, Conn. – April 11, 2023 – NBC Sports earned 38 Sports Emmy Award nominations for 2022, highlighted by nominations for its coverage of the 2022 Winter Olympic Games, Sunday Night Football, the 148th Kentucky Derby, golf, and more. The announcement was made today by the National Academy of Television Arts & Sciences. The winners will be announced on Monday, May 22. Highlights of NBC Sports’ nominations:     Sunday Night Football — primetime television’s No. 1 show — was nominated again for Outstanding Live Sports Series, which it has won 11 times in the past 14 years;
By   	Will Thorne  Staff Writer Beau Ferrari has been promoted to the role of Chairman of NBCUniversal Telemundo Enterprises, succeeding Cesar Conde who departed to head up NBCUniversal News Group in May. In his new role, Ferrari will oversee the company’s media portfolio which includes the Telemundo broadcast network. He will report to directly to NBCUniversal Television and Streaming chairman Mark Lazarus, and direct a substantial portfolio within NBCU which also comprises entertainment, sports, news, cable, global studios and 30 local stations. “Beau is a strong leader with extraordinary business acumen and deep media experience across all media platforms and the Hispanic market. During his three years with the company, he has made a tremendous impact as Telemundo became one of NBCUniversal’s fastest-growing businesses,” said Lazarus. He added, “Beau is ideally suited to seamlessly take over the reins of Telemundo and build on its phenomenal success.”            Ferrari has served as executive vice president of NBCUniversal Telemundo Enterprises since 2017, overseeing the company’s operations, financial performance, corporate strategy and development for the portfolio of businesses. “It’s an incredible honor to lead the talented team at Telemundo Enterprises, particularly at a time when there is so much momentum in this business,” said Ferrari. “I am excited for the opportunity to take the company to the next level and guide Telemundo’s continued growth.
Prior to joining Peacock in October 2021, Campbell was President of Hulu, where she led the SVOD and live-TV streaming businesses, following a role as Hulu’s Chief Marketing Officer, where she guided overall marketing and drove Hulu’s strategic brand vision and voice. Prior to joining Hulu, Campbell spent more than a decade at Google in marketing leadership roles across the Google Ads and Google Cloud businesses. Campbell is a graduate of Harvard Business School and Vanderbilt University. A respected leader and innovator, Campbell has been recognized as one of Business Insider’s Most Innovative CMOs, the Adweek 50, AdAge’s Women to Watch, FierceCable’s The Fierce 50: Executives Reshaping the Business of Pay TV, and Forbes’ Most Influential Global CMOs.   Cesar Conde Chairman, NBCUniversal News Group  Cesar Conde was named Chairman of NBCUniversal News Group in May 2020. In this role, Conde has oversight of NBC News, CNBC, MSNBC, NBC News NOW, Telemundo Enterprises and NBCUniversal Local, which includes 43 NBC/Telemundo local stations.   Under Conde’s leadership, the NBCU News Group has made substantial investments in digital and streaming, accelerating its leading position across all platforms.
By  Jay Peters and  Emma Roth Elon Musk has created a new company dedicated to artificial intelligence — and it’s called X.AI, as first reported by The Wall Street Journal. The company, which a Nevada filing indicates was incorporated last month, currently has Musk as its director and Jared Birchall, the director of Musk’s family office, listed as its secretary. The filing, which The Verge has also obtained, indicates that Musk incorporated the business on March 9th, 2023. Rumors about Musk starting up an AI company have been floating around for days, with a report from Business Insider revealing that Musk had purchased thousands of graphic processing units (GPUs) to power an upcoming generative AI product. The Financial Times similarly reported that Musk planned to create an AI firm to compete with the Microsoft-backed OpenAI. Musk even reportedly sought funding from SpaceX and Tesla investors to get the company started. During an interview on Twitter Spaces, when Musk was asked about all the GPUs he purchased, the billionaire made no mention of his plans to build an AI company, stating “it seems like everyone and their dog is buying GPUs at this point.” The purported X.AI name matches the branding of the X Corp. name he has since assigned to Twitter, along with the “X” label he’s applied to his vision of an “everything app.
Musk was one of the tech leaders who earlier this year called for AI developers to agree to a six-month pause before building systems more powerful than OpenAI's latest model, GPT-4. Around the same time, he had already been working to start his own AI company, according to Nevada business records. —With reporting by the Associated Press.  First published on July 12, 2023 / 6:04 PM   © 2023 CBS Interactive Inc. All Rights Reserved.  Copyright ©2023 CBS Interactive Inc. All rights reserved. Quotes delayed at least 15 minutes. Market data provided by ICE Data Services. ICE Limitations. Powered and implemented by FactSet. News provided by The Associated Press. Legal Statement.
Filed under: It’s the middle of April, the big Hokie Hi weekend has passed, and the biggest of the big campus celebration events was the Spring Football Game.  There were lots of things to look at and analyze but for now, here are some shots and comments from the game.  GO HOKIES!!! The crowd was easily over 20,000 people.  Hokie Hi weekend featured Friday and Saturday celebrations with an evening tribute to the fallen 32 from April 16th 2007.  The morning on Saturday was the 3.2 mile Run and Walk for Remembrance, and the crowd there was estimated to be 15,000 or so.  The weather in Blacksburg not only cooperated, it assisted by being comfortably warm, without being hot, and a light breeze was blowing.  It was a magnificent way to honor the fallen and celebrate their memories as Hokies.   The Maroon Squad Offense was obviously mostly #1s int he depth chart, with Grant Wells starting at Maroon Squad QB.  He’d remain there for the first half.   We’ll talk about the various observations in a coming article, but overall, he did well and seemed like he was much more comfortable than he was last season.  We’ll take that as a major plus, for now.
The Virginia Tech Hokies wrapped up their Spring portion of the off-season with the 2023 Annual Spring Game. The spectacle filled Lane Stadium to half capacity and was televised by the ACC Network. It was the first chance for thousands of fans to watch the 2023 Virginia Tech Hokies in a simulated game atmosphere. The contest resulted in a lop-sided affair, won by Team Maroon over Team White, with a final score of 34-0. Here are five takeaways from the action we saw on the field on Saturday:  1. Quarterback Competition is far from over as Wells and Drones continue to battle it out There was never going to be a definitive answer exiting the Spring Game, but we all got the chance to see the development of Grant Wells and the capabilities of Kyron Drones at the quarterback position. Wells finished 12-of-18 for 148 passing yards (66.7%) and a TD. He had 3 rushes for 10 yards and a rushing touchdown. Notably, Wells threw 6 passes that were gains of 16-or-more yards. The incumbent starter mostly linked up with the Gosnell brothers (Stephen and Benji) and Tucker Holloway. Wells executed his plays and limited the risky elements of his playstyle. It also helps that he inherited the more stable offensive line, which once again benefited his performance.
“I am proud CCSSO has had the privilege to support excellent teachers like Rebecka through the National Teacher of the Year Program for more than 70 years.”  Every year, exemplary teachers from each state, U.S. extra-state territories, the District of Columbia and the Department of Defense Education Activity are selected as State Teachers of the Year. From that group, the National Teacher of the Year is chosen by a selection committee composed of 17 individuals and education organizations. The Selection Committee said in a statement: “Rebecka is a caring and passionate educator who understands the importance of connections and providing individual supports for students, both in her math classes and beyond. She has a deep knowledge of both education policy and teaching practices and understands that sustained change at a small scale can make a big difference for students. We know people across the country will connect with the stories she shares as the 2023 National Teacher of the Year.”    “Rebecka Peterson has inspired our children in the classroom — but we all know that her work is not done yet, and she will inspire millions of others in her very young but distinct career. Rebecka has changed the lives of countless students; she impacts all those around her and makes everyone better. She finds potential not only in our children, but in our teachers as well,” Oklahoma State Superintendent of Public Instruction Ryan Walters said. “She represents Oklahoma’s future and reassures us all that the future is bright.
The Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) is thrilled to announce the finalists selected to interview for 2023 National Teacher of the Year. This group of exemplary teachers is:    CCSSO’s National Teacher of the Year Program identifies exceptional educators across the country, celebrates their work in and outside the classroom and offers them a one-of-a-kind professional development opportunity.  The 2023 cohort includes 55 educators. From that group, the National Teacher of the Year selection committee, which includes representatives from 16 education organizations, selects a group of finalists based on a robust application process.  The finalists will interview with the National Teacher of the Year Program’s selection committee, and CCSSO will announce the 2023 National Teacher of the Year later this spring.   Special thanks to the National Teacher of the Year Program sponsors: Google for Education, Equitable, Pearson, Cambium Assessment, Cognia, Curriculum Associates, Data Recognition Corporation, ETS, GoGuardian, MetaMetrics, NWEA, Smarter Balanced and Voya.
2023 Douglas County Fair & Rodeo runs July 28 – Aug. 6  				 				Posted on July 18, 2023			 				2023Fair and RodeoNews and Events  Share Are you still looking for one last taste of summer fun before the kids head back to school? Get your tickets now to the 2023 Douglas County Fair & Rodeo, packed with fun for every member of your family. Check out this year’s lineup and join us in just 10 days! Kick-off concert: If you listen to Country music radio, you know Randy Houser! Houser will be kicking off the entertainment with an incredible concert experience featuring Chase Bryant at 7 p.m. Friday, July 28, in Castle Rock. Tickets start at just $25 and are on sale now. A lighted drone show will play between the two acts. Farm to Table: A feast for your senses starts at 11 a.m. Sunday, July 30, with the much-anticipated return of the Farm to Table lunch at the Fairgrounds. This unique experience is far more than a chef-inspired meal. Dueling pianos play in the background as you sip mimosas and mingle with the farmers, vendors and chef who are responsible for the meal you’re about to enjoy. See this year’s menu and grab your tickets online now!
Sign up for email updates from Douglas County Fair & Rodeo      Save yourself time, No waiting in line!   Purchase tickets online and have them sent straight to your phone, email or have them mailed to you!  All ticket sales subject to applicable fees.     BUY TICKETS  Military and first responders, click here GOVX Military to receive your complimentary ProRodeo Ticket for Friday, August 4th or Sunday, August 6th. Thank you for your service!                  Saturday, July 29 10:00am – 11:00pm      Sunday, July 30 11:00am – 10:00pm         Wednesday, August 2 3:00pm – 10:00pm          Thursday, August 3 2:00pm – 10:00pm   Friday, August 4 12:00pm – 11:30pm         Saturday, August 5 9:00am – 11:30pm         Sunday, August 6 9:00am – 4:00pm
Two decades after entering India, Apple is gearing up to launch its first set of retail stores in the populous South Asian nation, signaling the tech giant’s growing interest in the market. Apple said on Tuesday it plans to open Apple BKC in Mumbai on April 18 and Apple Saket in Delhi on April 20. The iPhone-maker’s first retail stores in India have been long-anticipated, but the limited market for high-end smartphones and laptops in the country has tempered Apple’s expansion efforts. Despite being the world’s second-largest internet market, the majority of smartphones sold in India are priced below $250. While India accounts for a small portion of Apple’s overall revenue, the iPhone-maker has expressed optimism about the nation’s potential for growth. Apple said that the new retail locations “mark a significant expansion in India that will offer great new ways to browse, discover, and buy Apple products with exceptional service and experiences for customers.” In preparation for the store openings, Apple has been actively recruiting employees in recent months, according to growing job postings. The company, which launched its Indian online store in 2020, had initially planned to open its first retail location in 2021, but the COVID-19 pandemic forced a delay. Apple is also working to turn India into a key global hardware manufacturing hub, thanks in part to the incentives New Delhi is offering to manufacturers to expand their presence in the country.
The Apple Store is a chain of retail stores owned and operated by Apple Inc. The stores sell various Apple products, including Mac personal computers, iPhone smartphones, iPad tablet computers, Apple Watch smartwatches, Apple TV digital media players, software, and both Apple-branded and selected third-party accessories.  The first Apple Stores were originally opened as two locations in May 2001 by then-CEO Steve Jobs, after years of attempting but failing store-within-a-store concepts. Seeing a need for improved retail presentation of the company's products, he began an effort in 1997 to revamp the retail program to get an improved relationship with consumers and hired Ron Johnson in 2000. Jobs relaunched Apple's online store in 1997 and opened the first two physical stores in 2001. The media initially speculated that Apple would fail, but its stores were highly successful, bypassing the sales numbers of competing nearby stores and within three years reached US$1 billion in annual sales, becoming the fastest retailer in history to do so. Apple has expanded the number of retail locations and its geographical coverage over the years, with 526 stores across 26 countries and regions worldwide, opening its latest store in the Battersea district of London, United Kingdom on June 15, 2023.[2][3] Strong product sales have placed Apple among the top-tier retail stores, with sales over $16 billion globally in 2011.
After two years in New York City, the CAA World Congress of Sports is moving back to the West Coast in 2023 and its pre-pandemic time slot in the spring. The program will be taking place April 18-19 at the JW Marriott Los Angeles L.A. LIVE. World Congress is the largest and most prestigious sports business conference in North America. In draws more than 800 attendees, including league officers; team owners and presidents; corporate sponsors and advertisers; media executives and agency heads. While the program addresses the business of sports from the perspective of the industry’s top executives, it also features speakers and topics that transcend sports. In addition to the content, World Congress is known as a networking hub where high-profile discussions take place and deals get done among the industry’s top stakeholders. Info@nilnewsstand.
Email events@SportsBusinessJournal.com Now in its 20th year, the 2021 CAA World Congress of Sports will be returning to the city where it all began. The program will take place at the New York Marriott Marquis in the Broadway Ballroom, New York City’s most spacious and newly renovated ballroom, which has been home to the Sports Business Awards since 2009.       © 2023 Leaders Group. All rights reserved.The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Leaders Group.
Google CEO Sundar Pichai’s 2022 Compensation Valued at $226 Million Listen (2 min) Google CEO Sundar Pichai’s 2022 Compensation Valued at $226 Million Listen (2 min)  This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com.  https://www.wsj.com/articles/google-ceo-sundar-pichais-2022-compensation-valued-at-226-million-e43ec06f By  Updated April 22, 2023 1:11 pm ET Listen (2 min) Sundar Pichai, chief executive of Alphabet Inc. and Google, was awarded compensation in 2022 valued at $226 million, according to a regulatory filing Friday, including a triannual stock award valued at more than $200 million.In 2019, the last year his compensation included a triannual stock grant, his compensation was valued at $281 million.  Copyright ©2023 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8 Continue reading your article witha WSJ subscription Already a subscriber?
Justin Sullivan/Getty Images News Alphabet's (NASDAQ:GOOG) (NASDAQ:GOOGL) CEO Sundar Pichai received $226M in total compensation in 2022, including a $218M equity award via a triennial stock grant. Annual salary was $2M, with the CEO's compensation package also including almost $6M for personal security. Difficult time? The news comes as Alphabet (GOOG) (GOOGL) initiates cost restructuring measures, including layoffs of 12,000 workers, or 6% of workforce. Pichai even said in January that top executives would get lower bonuses as part of cost-cutting measures. In December, the company granted a new triannual equity award to Pichai with a value of $210M. In 2019, the last year his compensation included a triannual stock grant, his compensation was valued at $281M. Have a tip? Submit confidentially to our News team. Found a factual error? Report here.
That's in line with when Google normally holds its developers conference — last year's edition took place on May 11 and May 12, for example. There will be an in-person event at the Shoreline Amphitheatre in Mountain View, Calif., a venue that's just down the street from Google headquarters. Most people will attend virtually, though since Google streams its developer conference. The Google I/O 2023 website promises a kickoff keynote that gets underway at 1 p.m. ET/ 10 a.m. PT/ 6 p.m. BST on May 10. A developer keynote will follow afterward, diving into more detail on tools available to Google developers. You can find a full Google I/O 2013 schedule listing the different presentations. The Google I/O 2023 agenda doesn't provide any specific details about what's in store on May 10. But we can make some educated guesses about what's on tap, given Google's past announcements and rumors about the company's current plans. Google Bard is just the start of the company's grand plans for AI-powered search. According to a report in The New York Times, Samsung is considering ditching Google as the default search engine for its devices in favor of Bing. And Google is feverishly working on the next stage of its search engine which will integrate a chatbot.  Dubbed Project Magi, Google has reportedly devoted a large portion of its staff to accelerating the implementation of AI into its search engine.
All sessions will be on demand to watch at your convenience. Check back on the site to see the full program. There are no tickets this year; everyone can register online to join us. Register now. Registration for Google I/O 2023 enables you to stay up to date about the schedule and content along with relevant developer news via non-spammy email. As a registrant, you can also create a developer profile to get the most out of the digital experience by saving and viewing content that's relevant to you. If you’re unregistered you can still view the keynotes and sessions, but you won’t receive communications related to the event. In addition, you won’t be able to save content to view later or get recommendations via your developer profile. Attendees must be at least 18 years of age to participate in Google I/O. You don’t! But creating a developer profile enables My I/O,  which allows you to select interests and receive content recommendations. Yes. My I/O is powered by your developer profile interests, which can be changed anytime in your settings. My I/O is a custom panel on the event website that helps you keep track of content you’re interested in. Content you save to My I/O will also be saved to your developer profile dashboard so you can watch it after the event is over. If you’re having trouble signing in to register, it may be that you did not grant developer profile  access.
And I think that actually, through this experience, I’ve been able to transform that into a sense of trust, which is a really nice feeling,” she said.   	The Broadway production is lead produced by James Bierman of Empire Street Productions. Bierman noted the production was able to recoup while also offering lower-priced tickets, including $10 lottery tickets and $45 rush tickets throughout the run.  	           	“Bringing Prima Facie to Broadway has been a journey of responsibility and faith that has been met with a response that we only dared to dream of when we set out. Suzie Miller’s urgent play, Justin Martin’s forensic direction, and our design team’s visceral production have been the backdrop for Jodie Comer’s extraordinary performance as Tessa Ensler, and the way that audiences have embraced all of this has been truly humbling,” Bierman said.   	A film adaptation of Prima Facie is in the works, with Cynthia Erivo set to star and executive produce. Sign up for THR news straight to your inbox every day Sign up for THR news straight to your inbox every day Subscribe for full access to The Hollywood Reporter Send us a tip using our anonymous form.
The production has grossed close to $1 million for several weeks of its run, with an average ticket price hovering around $150 and capacity close to 100 percent.  	The recoupment comes a week after Comer won the Tony Award for best lead actress in a play. In Prima Facie, written by Suzie Miller and directed by Justin Martin, Comer plays Tessa, a young, ambitious lawyer who defends individuals accused of sexual assault and then goes through the legal system herself as a victim of rape. While accepting her Tony Award on stage, Comer acknowledged the responsibility she feels in taking on the role.   	“To every person who feels represented by Tessa, this has been the greatest honor and it continues to be,” she said.  	The play marks Comer’s Broadway debut. The Killing Eve actress played the role on the West End, where she made her professional stage debut and won an Olivier Award for her performance, for a run that began in April 2022. After being with the role for more than a year, Comer told The Hollywood Reporter that she feels changed by the experience.   	“I feel like I have so much more trust within myself and who I am. I realized that I was quite fearful last year of a lot of things, especially in my ability to do this.
LOS ANGELES — Coyne Lloyd, a 35-year-old tech investor, was visiting his family in Upstate New York recently when he decided to set up some dates in the city. He fired up Hinge, his preferred dating app, and swiped on a few interesting women. After receiving a couple of matches, he turned, out of curiosity, to a new AI dating tool called Rizz to break the ice. “There’s some amount of mental work and barrier to thinking of how to compose a message [on a dating app],” Lloyd said. “It’s like getting started on a term paper.” Rizz, which is meant to function as a digital wingman, helps users come up with killer opening lines and responses to potential matches. The company behind it is just one of many start-ups trying to transform romance through artificial intelligence by optimizing and automating online dating, now one of the primary ways by which people find romantic connections. Using dating apps can be a slog. Some people complain that they have to sift through countless matches as others indiscriminately swipe; it is difficult to start conversations with strangers; and many users end up viewing the apps more as a necessary chore than an exciting opportunity to connect with someone new. Additionally, the world is becoming more automated: Email messages auto-complete, subscription services auto-renew, and any product under the sun is a single click away.
Mirakyan's interest in an app like his, however, seems to go deeper than Lloyd's term paper comparison. Speaking to WaPo, he explained that he's always had a difficult time reading social cues — a dating stressor that a tool like YourMove.ai helps to alleviate. "There's such a gap currently," he told the newspaper, "in what people like myself want to communicate and how it comes across." That's sympathetic, in a sense, and we could see how AI assistance might benefit folks who have a tough time socially. At the same time, however, balance is definitely still needed here. Romance is one of the most human things out there, and the digital dating world is robotic enough as it is. Do we really want everyone on the apps just passing AI-generated quips and complements back and forth for eternity? That's starting to sound like The Sims — and as humans, maybe we should shoot a little higher. More on post-AI online dating: Man "Sure" His AI Girlfriend Will save Him When the Robots Take Over Share This Article DISCLAIMER(S) Articles may contain affiliate links which enable us to share in the revenue of any purchases made. Registration on or use of this site constitutes acceptance of our Terms of Service. © Recurrent Ventures Inc, All Rights Reserved.
Jeff Carlisle joins Futbol Americas to discuss the reported appointment of Matt Crocker as USMNT sporting director. (1:57) British football executive Matt Crocker was hired Tuesday as sporting director of the U.S. Soccer Federation and will lead the search for the United States men's national team coach, a job that has been uncertain since Gregg Berhalter was pushed aside during an investigation that developed from a feud with the Reyna family. Crocker will start the job on Aug. 2 but will begin the coach search process immediately, the USSF said. - Stream on ESPN+: FA Cup, LaLiga, Bundesliga, more (U.S.) In introducing Crocker, USSF president Cindy Parlow Cone said he, "brings a wealth of knowledge having worked at various roles and at various levels of our game. He will set the sporting vision for U.S. soccer and implement the technical plan for the women's men's extended and youth national teams." Crocker will also be providing support for the USWNT during the World Cup prior to his start date. She added that Crocker, "excels in communication as well as being a team builder. He is driven, he's creative and committed to building relationships at every level of the game. His passion for the game, his experience and expertise will make U.S. Soccer better.
U.S. Soccer plans to narrow the focus of its sporting director job as part of a slight but significant restructuring near the top of the federation. The role has been vacant since Earnie Stewart departed last month. In 2019, it was essentially created for Stewart, who extended his responsibilities beyond the U.S. men's national team, to all of U.S. Soccer's national teams and even to the sport's broader American ecosystem. But now, as U.S. Soccer's leaders conduct what they are calling "a global search" for Stewart's successor, they have also changed the job description. President Cindy Parlow Cone said Saturday that the new sporting director, whom they expect to hire before July's Women's World Cup, will "really focus on our national teams ... and our technical plan at the elite level." They have essentially split Stewart's job — which "was huge," Parlow Cone said — into two. They will create a new position to oversee the broader landscape. That new executive, who will report to CEO JT Batson, will focus on everything from coaching education to referee development, and on "growing youth and adult participation," Batson said. This will, in turn, allow the sporting director to work almost exclusively on the elite player pathway and the environments and structures surrounding U.S. Soccer's 27 national teams — from the USMNT and USWNT all the way on down to youth teams and what U.S.
Oklahoma State University Big 12 Championships - Day 3  April 23, 2023  | Cowgirl Golf
USC won its eighth team crown in program history, equaling the most in league history, and Stanford sophomore Rose Zhang set or matched several scoring records in claiming the individual title at the 2023 Pac-12 Women's Golf Championships hosted by Arizona State at Papago Golf Club in Phoenix. A full recap can be found here.
Featuring a mix of motion capture and voice over, here's the main cast. Star Wars Jedi: Survivor takes place five years after the first game, Star Wars Jedi: Fallen Order, and follows Cal Kestis, one of the few survivors of the Great Jedi Purge, as he fights against the Galactic Empire and the forces of the Dark Side as they try to eliminate the remaining Jedi. RELATED: Every Stance In Star Wars: Jedi Survivor, Ranked The game uses a mixture of traditional voice acting and motion capture for its characters. Many characters are modeled after a likeness of their voice actor, while others are droids or alien creatures. Below is a list of the main characters featured in the game and some insight into who is playing them. A new character for the Star Wars canon introduced in this game, Turgle is a frog-like creature who frequents Pylon's Saloon. A quickly beloved character by fans, Turgle is voiced by seasoned voice actor Richard Steven Horvitz, known for voicing Zim in Invader Zim, and Billy in The Grim Adventures of Billy and Mandy, among multiple other credits. You can find Turgle on the planet Koboh, where part of the game's story will involve assisting him. Turgle is a comedic character, matching the personality of other characters in Horvitz's work.
Star Wars Jedi: Survivor tells a layered and fantastic story, and its cast of characters elevates that beyond expectations. Star Wars Jedi: Survivor follows up Fallen Order with Cal's biggest and most trying adventure yet. As he seeks to find peace for those around him, and ultimately within himself, he works alongside new and old characters in order to achieve his goals - while fighting against dangerous new threats, too. RELATED: Things We Wish We Knew Before Playing Star Wars Jedi: Survivor There are a few standout characters in Star Wars Jedi: Survivor that truly highlight the whole experience, working as a significant and impactful part of the overarching story. These are the best and most memorable characters in Jedi: Survivor. Warning: There Will Be Spoilers For The Story Of Star Wars Jedi: Survivor This lovable frog is quick to win players' hearts, as you meet him just outside of Pyloon's Saloon in Cal's first time on Koboh. About to be executed by Rayvis and his raiders, Cal steps in to save him.  After this, Turgle can be found in Pyloon's Saloon for the remainder of the game, and is available for conversations as the story progresses. His part might not be the biggest, but he deserves all the love.  This little fisherman can be encountered all throughout the locations of Koboh, helping Cal to catch new species of fish after their introduction.
Lena subdues Salim while Ria finally masters a reverse spinning kick to defeat Raheela, and the police arrive as the sisters drive off. Reconciling with Lena, Ria finally receives an encouraging email from Eunice, and the sisters celebrate together.  In January 2022 it was revealed a feminist action comedy focusing on two British-Pakistani sisters was being filmed in London by Nida Manzoor with Working Title, Focus Features and Parkville Pictures, with a tone and voice similar to Manzoor’s breakthrough and BAFTA, Peabody, and Rose d'Or award winning sitcom series We Are Lady Parts.[5]  In February 2022 it was announced that filming had wrapped on the project in London. It is produced by Tim Bevan and Eric Fellner for Working Title with Olivier Kaempfer and John Pocock for Parkville Pictures. Focus Features had distribution rights.[2][6][7]  The typography & graphic design for the title card, credits, chapter headings and fight sequence introductions was designed by Peter Anderson Studio.[8]  Polite Society was released at the 2023 Sundance Film Festival on 21 January 2023,[9] at the 2023 Glasgow Film Festival on 12 March 2023,[10] and was released in the United Kingdom and the United States on 28 April 2023.[11][12]
Manzoor lists directors Mira Nair (The Namesake) and Deepa Mehta (Elements trilogy) as two people who inspire her, since they feature South Asian women in their projects. "It made me believe that our stories are worth being told," Manzoor says, noting that she also looks up to Pedro Almodóvar. "He centered women in a way that I hadn't experienced before." Tamara Jenkins' 1998 debut film Slums of Beverly Hills, which is about a teenage girl struggling to grow up in a lower-middle-class nomadic Jewish family that relocates every few months, made Manzoor feel seen as a teenager. "Each of her movies expresses a real truth of womanhood and there's a rawness to her work that I gravitate to," she explains. In addition to Slums of Beverly Hills, Jenkins directed The Savages and Private Life. Since Manzoor is focused on telling women-centric tales, it makes sense that Jane Austen's works have always resonated with her. "There's something in the way she explores the pressure of society and being a woman who wants to strike out on her own," she says.  Polite Society is in theaters now.
Create a free profile to get unlimited access to exclusive show news, updates, and more! The NBC comedy wrapped its second season on April 28. Grab your glasses everyone, because it's time to talk Grand Crew. The comedy series, created by Brooklyn Nine-Nine's Phil Augusta Jackson, officially returned in March for Season 2. Watch Grand Crew on NBC and Peacock.   "I kept saying since we wrapped that we would get renewed for a second season," Nicole Byer, who plays Nicky on the show, told NBC Insider. "So when we got renewed I said, 'Listen to Black women!'" Echo Kellum, who plays Noah, explained that he was also optimistic about returning for a second season. "I was very ecstatic. A little surprised, but I kind of saw it coming because I knew if it was really about the chemistry of the cast, the content of the show, then we'd be in good footing," he said.  Read on to learn what you need to know about the second season of Grand Crew:  The Season 2 finale aired on Friday, April 28 at 8:30/7:30c with a special back-to-back two episode event: Episode 9's "Wine & Journals" and Episode 10's "Wine & Tastings."  Like Season 1, there are a total of 10 episodes of Grand Crew for Season 2.
It’s currently on a hiatus and it’s also hard to say when the new season will come back to the NBC as the premiere date hasn’t even yet been confirmed yet online. We’re hopeful that Grand Crew season 2 is currently shooting and the premiere date will be sometime in early 2023. Its regular time slot is 8:30 p.m. EST on Tuesdays. The show might have to compete with upcoming pilots who might compete for its time slot. With that being said, hopefully there isn’t a drastic last-minute change to the 2022-2023 lineup. Other shows to watch out for include American Auto, Young Rock, Quantam Leap, La Brea, and New Amsterdam. And for those of you who haven’t met the crew yet, what are you waiting for? This group of millennials will have you laughing all night long. Check out the trailer and see for yourself below: Grand Crew is currently available to stream on Peacock. Stay updated with Hidden Remote for the latest updates on the second season of the show. Build your custom FanSided TV email newsletter with news and analysis on All Television and all your favorite sports teams, TV shows, and more. Your favorite teams, topics, and players all on your favorite mobile devices. © 2023 Minute Media - All Rights Reserved. The content on this site is for entertainment and educational purposes only. All betting content is intended for an audience ages 21+.
Comedian Roy Wood Jr. headlines the 2023 White House Correspondents' Association Dinner. President Biden makes remarks at the White House Correspondent' Association Dinner. The "Daily Show" correspondent Roy Wood Jr headlines the White House Correspondents' Association Dinner. Live coverage of celebrities, journalists, and other guests walking the red carpet as they arrive for the 2023 White House Correspondents' Association dinner. President Biden gives remarks at the first White House Correspondents' Association Dinner since 2019. The Daily Show host Trevor Noah headlines as the evening’s entertainment. Historian and author Ron Chernow is the keynote speaker at the White House Correspondents' Association’s 2019 annual dinner in Washington, DC. Journalists, politicians, members of the Trump administration, and celebrities gather for the White House Correspondents' Association annual dinner in Washington, D.C., with entertainment provided by comedian Michelle Wolf. The Daily Show’s Hasan Minhaj entertains reporters, public officials, and celebrities at the 2017 White House Correspondents' Association dinner. Neither President Trump nor members of his administration attended the event. President Obama and comedian Larry Wilmore speak at the White House Correspondents' Association annual dinner, which brings together journalists, politicians, and celebrities at the Washington Hilton.
April 29, 2023 WHCA photo by Mike Theiler WHCA photo by Mike Theiler WHCA Photo by Mike Theiler WHCA Photo by Mike Theiler WHCA Photo by Mike Theiler WHCA Photo by Mike Theiler WHCA photo by Mike Theiler WHCA photo by Mike Theiler WHCA Photo by Mike Theiler WHCA Photo by Mike Theiler WHCA Photo by Mike Theiler WHCA Photo by Mike Theiler WHCA Photo by Mike Theiler WHCA Photo by Mike Theiler WHCA photo by Mike Theiler WHCA photo by Mike Theiler WHCA Board WHCA Photo by Mike Theiler WHCA photo by Mike Theiler WHCA photo by Mike Theiler WHCA Photo by Mike Theiler The annual dinner of the White House Correspondents’ Association will be on April 29, 2023. Our annual dinner is our main source of revenue to finance all of our work, including support of the journalists working to cover the president, events and programs to educate the public about the value of the First Amendment and a free press, and scholarships to help the next generation of journalists.
The Chinese city of Chengdu will be the host city for The World Games 2025. On Thursday 9 May, in Gold Coast, Australia, the Mayor of Chengdu, Mr Luo Qiang, signed the Organiser Agreement for the 12th edition of the multi-sports event.  The Vice President of IOC and the Chinese Olympic Committee, Mr Yu Zaiqing, signed the agreement as Witness. President Jose Perurena  signed on behalf of the International World Games Association. This was preceded by ratification of the contract by the 37 member federations of the IWGA during the Annual General Meeting at the SportAccord Convention in Gold Coast. Chengdu follows the city of Birmingham, Alabama as host. The 11th edition of The World Games will take place there from 15 to 25 July 2021.  Jose Perurena said at a press briefing afterwards: “By signing a contract with one of the most forward-looking and dynamic cities in China, we have signalled our arrival as a major power in international sport.” The IWGA President added: ”Following our 2021 event in another great country, the USA, we are excited now to start work with our Chinese partners on plans for 2025.”  Chengdu Mayor, Mr Luo Qiang, said: "Chengdu highly appreciates the concept of the IWGA and believe that it is in line with Chengdu's development philosophy.
After months of anticipation and years of preparation, we finally have our 16 host cities and venues for the 2026 World Cup, which will be hosted by the United States, Canada and Mexico. The major takeaways: 11 U.S. cities were selected from the candidate pool, with three cities in Mexico and two Canadian cities joining the fray as well. The List: United States: New York/New Jersey, Philadelphia, Boston, Atlanta, Miami, Houston, Dallas, Kansas City, Seattle, San Francisco/Bay Area and Los Angeles Canada: Vancouver, Toronto Mexico: Mexico City, Guadalajara, Monterrey The tournament was awarded to the North American and CONCACAF rivals four years ago, fending off a strong bid from Morocco, and will be a notable competition for several reasons. It will be the first World Cup hosted by more than one nation since 2002, when Japan and South Korea shared the honors, and it'll be the first World Cup with three hosts. Mexico will make history as the first nation to host or co-host for a third time (following 1970 and 1986), the U.S. will be second-time hosts (following 1994), and it will be Canada's first time hosting the men's tournament, having been the site of the Women's World Cup in 2015.
As a result of the purchase, ownership by TCW management and employees increased to 44%, while Carlyle maintains a 31% interest in the firm.  As of June 30, 2023, TCW had $210 billion of assets under management or committed to management.[8] The CEO of The TCW Group is Katie Koch.[9]
Kathryn Koch was named president and CEO of TCW Group, a news release said Tuesday.  Ms. Koch, who will join the manager in the coming months, was previously CIO of the public equity business at Goldman Sachs Asset Management. She will succeed David Lippman, who is retiring from the firm when his contract expires at the end of 2022. In August 2021, sources said he was expected to leave when the impending departure of Tad Rivelle, CIO of fixed income, was announced. Mr. Lippman has been CEO of TCW Group since 2012. A TCW Group spokesman said in an email that Ms. Koch was selected for "her broad experience in domestic and international business development and strategic planning." GSAM announced Ms. Koch's departure in a statement on Tuesday emailed by a spokeswoman. She will not be directly replaced, and the heads of the three primary investment platforms within public equities will report to Ashish Shah, CIO of public investing. Those are Steve Barry, CIO of fundamental equities, Monali Vora, head of quantitative equity solutions; and Osman Ali and Dennis Walsh, co-heads of quantitative investing.  TCW Group has about $220 billion in assets under management. Ms. Koch could not be immediately reached for further information.   Sign up and get the best of News delivered straight to your email inbox, free of charge. Choose your news – we will deliver.
The Pixel Fold is available for pre-order from today (May 10), with general sales in June. Incredibly, as of late May, the top 512GB Pixel Fold model is already sold out in the US. If you pre-order the Pixel Fold, Google will also toss in a free Pixel Watch, although this promotion is limited to Germany, the UK, and the US (leaving Japan in the lurch). Otherwise, everyone also gets a 2TB Google One plan for six months and a three-month subscription to YouTube Premium. There’s also a trade-in program for those who want to switch their current handset for the foldable. Google accepts products from Apple, LG, Motorola, OnePlus, and Samsung, and the trade-in’s value differs between the various models. Notably, you can also trade in Google Pixels. For instance, the 128GB Pixel 7 Pro will get you $380 off the Fold’s price. Visit Google’s trade-in portal for the full list of products and offers. The Pixel Fold hasn’t made its mass market debut yet, so you won’t find expert reviews of the foldable. However, based on our experience with the device at Google I/O 2023, the Pixel Fold should do more than enough to challenge the likes of Samsung in this space. In his hands-on preview, C. Scott Brown “came away impressed” by the Pixel Fold. “It felt great. It looked great.
The Google Pixel Fold was in the rumor mill for more than a year, without Google ever acknowledging it's working on it until a few days before Google I/O 2023. With this year's developer conference now out of the way, the cat is finally out of the bag, and we will soon be able to get our hands on Google's first foldable. We can only hope that this brings more foldables from other manufactures to the US, as more competition is always better. Keep your eyes peeled on June 27th if you're looking to pick one up at launch. Google's first foldable has arrived with a wider aspect ratio — inside and out — as well as the Tensor G2's AI finesse to help squeeze every pixel out of the cameras and every iota of productivity out of your day. Manuel Vonau is Android Police's Google Editor, with expertise in Android, Chrome, and other Google products — the very core of Android Police’s content. He has been covering tech news and reviewing devices since joining Android Police as a news writer in 2019. He lives in Berlin, Germany.  Manuel studied Media and Culture studies in Düsseldorf, finishing his university career with a master's thesis titled "The Aesthetics of Tech YouTube Channels: Production of Proximity and Authenticity." His background gives him a unique perspective on the ever-evolving world of technology and its implications on society.
What it is: Google’s first smartphone that folds in half, arriving next month How much does it cost? $1,799 to start What does it promise? A great camera and a design that means it’s easier to use (or tuck into a pocket) when closed More than a quarter of smartphone owners in the United States are “highly likely” to upgrade to a foldable model next, according to a survey conducted by Counterpoint Research. That leaves Google — long an also-ran in the U.S. smartphone market — with an opportunity. And thankfully, the company’s first attempt at a folding phone feels very different from the others you can buy right now. For one, this book-style foldable isn’t as awkward to use as some models. The Fold has a 5.8-inch external screen, and it’s proportions are pretty close to traditional smartphone screens. Rival models from Samsung, for example, have taller and slimmer displays on the outside, so sending text messages and browsing the web can feel a little awkward. Thankfully, that’s not the case here. It doesn’t hurt that the Pixel Fold is noticeably thinner than other Samsung options, either. At last: a folding smartphone that won’t feel super awkward in your back pocket. When open, the Fold’s internal 7.
6-inch screen is bright and easy on the eyes — it’s more than nice enough to take in your daily allotment of YouTube videos and e-books, not to mention running two apps side by side. The big bezels around the sides of the screen don’t look great, but they’re pretty comfortable places for your fingers to rest on when holding the phone. For better or worse, the Fold — like the much cheaper 7a — uses the same Tensor G2 processor as the company’s Pixel 7 phones, released last October. In our experience, that means the Fold should be plenty fast for daily use, if not quite as speedy as some other premium phones. For most people, though, the AI features Google uses this chip for — from improving the sound of your phone calls to automatically tweaking photos captured by the Fold’s three rear cameras — may be worth the trade-off. The catch: Where do we start? At nearly $1,800, the Fold is plain out of reach to many. Sure, it’s not alone there — Samsung’s premium Galaxy Z Fold 4 costs the same — but even luxe traditional smartphones cost hundreds less. And because the Fold physically bends in half, there’s a great chance of some kind of physical failure over time. (Brian Rakowski, vice president of product management at Google, told The Post the Fold’s hinge mechanism has been tested to survive more than 200,000 bends.
The labor market showed resilience in April, despite the Federal Reserve’s efforts to cool the economy. More jobs were added than in recent months, across a wide range of sectors, and the unemployment rate fell. Monthly change in jobs +500,000 jobs +253,000 in April +400,000 +300,000 +200,000 +100,000 April ’22 July Oct. Jan. ’23 April +500,000 jobs +253,000 in April +400,000 +300,000 +200,000 +100,000 April ’22 July Oct. Jan. ’23 April Note: Data is seasonally adjusted. Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics By Ella Koeze  Lydia DePillis Employers added 253,000 jobs in April, the Labor Department reported Friday, in a reversal of the cooling trend that had marked the first quarter and was expected to continue. The unemployment rate was 3.4 percent, down from 3.5 percent in March, and matched the level in January, which was the lowest since 1969. The higher-than-forecast job gain complicates the Federal Reserve’s potential shift toward a pause in interest rate increases. Chair Jerome H. Powell said on Wednesday that the central bank might continue to raise rates if new data showed the economy wasn’t slowing enough to keep prices down.
In February, there was an average of nearly 1.7 jobs for every unemployed job seeker. When Biden took office, there were fewer jobs than unemployed job seekers. The number of job openings in March is set to be released May 2. Labor Force Participation — One reason many job openings go unfilled is that millions of Americans left the workforce during the pandemic and haven’t returned. The labor force participation rate (the percentage of the total population over age 16 that is either employed or actively seeking work) has slowly recovered during Biden’s time, from 61.3% in January 2021 to 62.6% in March. That still leaves the rate well short of the pre-pandemic level of 63.3% for February 2020. The rate peaked at 67.3% more than two decades ago, during the first four months of 2000. Labor Department economists project that the rate will trend down to 60.1% in 2031, “primarily because of an aging population.” Manufacturing Jobs — During the presidential campaign, Biden promised he had a plan to create a million new manufacturing jobs — and whether it’s his doing or not, the number is rising briskly. As of March, the U.S. added 787,000 manufacturing jobs during Biden’s time, a 6.
To ensure an orderly transition, we have been working for months so that we can continue to meet the needs of those affected by COVID-19. Even beyond the end of the COVID-19 PHE, we will continue to work to protect Americans from the virus and its worst impacts by supporting access to COVID-19 vaccines, treatments, and tests, including for people without health insurance. We will continue to advance research into new, innovative vaccines and treatments through an investment of $5 billion in Project NextGen, a dedicated program to accelerate and streamline the rapid development of the next generation of vaccines and treatments, including investments in research, development, and manufacturing capacity and advancing critical science. And we are continuing to invest in efforts to better understand and address Long COVID and to help mitigate the impacts. What will not be affected by the end of the COVID-19 PHE:  The Administration’s continued response to COVID-19 is not fully dependent on the emergency declaration for the COVID-19 PHE, and there are significant flexibilities and actions that will not be affected when we transition from the current phase of our response on May 11. Access to COVID-19 vaccinations and certain treatments, such as Paxlovid and Lagevrio, will generally not be affected. To help keep communities safe from COVID-19, HHS remains committed to maximizing continued access to COVID-19 vaccines and treatments.
October 13, 2022 The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) must renew the federal public health emergency (PHE) related to COVID-19 every 90 days to maintain certain health care flexibilities and waivers. The PHE has been in place since January 27, 2020, and renewed throughout the pandemic. The latest HHS extension for the PHE is effective through January 11, 2023. In a letter to the state Governors, the Administration has indicated they will give at least a 60-day notice before the PHE ends. In April, ASHA urged HHS to extend the PHE in a letter to Secretary Xavier Becerra [PDF]. In addition, the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2022 (P.L. 117-103) provides a 151-day extension to some flexibilities, once the federal PHE ends. With this PHE renewal and the additional 151-day extension, ASHA expects certain flexibilities will continue at least into the second quarter of 2023, such as continued payment for audiology and speech-language pathology telehealth services provided to Medicare beneficiaries. With each PHE extension, numerous flexibilities and waivers remain in effect, including Medicare telehealth coverage of audiology and speech-language pathology services and relaxed Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) requirements. Clinicians should be aware that states may have different dates for ending local PHEs.
Microsoft 365 Copilot enabled access for a select group of customers to demonstrate what the new AI office assistant can do. Soon you could use it too! The Copilot writes content based on a few prompts to make your job easier. For example, ask for suggestions for your next meeting on Word and Copilot would list a few ideas.    The new MS tool becomes part of every Microsoft 365 app you use every day: Word, PowerPoint, Excel, Outlook, Teams and others.  A tool to help unleash creativity, uplevel skills, and unlock productivity—the new Microsoft 365 Copilot. More on AI for work from @CNNBusiness: https://t.co/VF6yWng8YE  Microsoft 365 Copilot adds the power of generative AI to your online workplace. For example, it would allow MS Word to write, edit and summarize your text. Meanwhile, you can use Copilot in PowerPoint to turn ideas into a designed presentation. For example, ask for a slide show related to AI assistants and it will create corresponding slides. It adds text descriptions and creates custom designs based on your topic. Excel with Copilot can also analyze data, identify trends and create data visualizations within minutes. Microsoft 365 Copilot manages your Outlook Inbox so you spend more time communicating with customers and colleagues. The AI tool improves meetings by providing “real-time summaries and action items” in the context of conversations.
It was included in Microsoft Office for Windows (versions 97 to 2003), in Microsoft Publisher and Microsoft Project (versions 98 to 2003), Microsoft FrontPage (versions 2002 and 2003), and Microsoft Office for Mac (versions 98 to 2004). The default assistant in the English version was named Clippit[1]), after a paperclip.[7][8]  The Office Assistant used technology initially from Microsoft Bob[9] and later Microsoft Agent, offering advice based on Bayesian algorithms.[3] From Office 2000 onward, Microsoft Agent (.acs) replaced the Microsoft Bob-descended Actor (.act) format as the technology supporting the feature. Users can add other assistants to the folder where Office is installed for them to show up in the Office application, or install in the Microsoft Agent folder in System32 folder. Microsoft Agent-based characters have richer forms and colors, and are not enclosed within a boxed window. Furthermore, the Office Assistant could use the Lernout & Hauspie TruVoice Text-to-Speech Engine to provide output speech capabilities to Microsoft Agent, but it required SAPI 4.0. The Microsoft Speech Recognition Engine allowed the Office Assistant to accept speech input.[10]
In addition to new smart devices, Google teased a new AI-enhanced Magic Editor tool at this year’s annual I/O conference. Though we only got a sneak peek, the results are impressive and prove that an era of advanced image manipulation for the masses isn’t far off, thanks to AI. Of course, AI-powered image editing is nothing new for Google. Handy tools like the Magic Eraser, for removing unwanted distractions, and Photo Unblur, for enhancing soft/blurred shots, have been around for several years. And Google has been leveraging AI to help organize and surface images in users’ libraries since 2015. But the Magic Editor takes AI-enhanced manipulation a leap further. Not only can users select and edit subjects (similar to using a mask in Lightroom/Capture One) but with a few taps of the screen you can easily scale and reposition subjects in the frame. The demo also shows the tool's ability to expand an image’s composition through generative AI. Of course, the results aren’t perfect. In the example with the balloons, for instance, the portion of the bench created using generative AI shows a noticeable red tint. Similarly, in the waterfall demo, the area under the subject’s arm shows an obvious repeating pattern in the rocks. These criticisms aside, the power of this tool to dramatically reshape image editing on the fly can’t be understated.
Masked region and Imagen Editor’s results for “a bouquet of red flowers,” “two trees,” “an Imagen Editor sign,” “a bush with green leaves,” and “a bush without leaves” Technically called inpainting, the process Google’s new tool uses is like an image restoration or something we can best describe as the confluence of Google AI and Adobe Photoshop’s Content Aware Fill. The researchers developed new encoders for Imagen Editor and also included an object detector module in the AI to compensate for incomplete or inaccurate masks. The research also includes a tool called EditBench to evaluate results of text-guided inpainting. Based on a 240-image dataset, the benchmark evaluated edits on both human-made and AI-generated images on parameters like the modified objects, their attributes like shape, size, number, and suitability for the scene. Google observed that object masking helps improve image-text alignment, making Imagen Editor better than alternatives like DALL-E 2 and StableDiffusion in all the categories EditBench tested. Unfortunately, Google has unspecified concerns related to the responsible use of AI, and that’s why it won’t be releasing Imagen Editor to the public. The company recently proposed a framework to safeguard AI development, and hopefully, a few hard limits can be established before giving people access to tools like Imagen Editor. On the bright side, EditBench is available in its entirety, for free, to help further AI research.
May 18, 2023 ... Since the release of ChatGPT, we've heard from users that they love using ChatGPT on the go. Today, we're launching the ChatGPT app for iOS.
The ChatGPT app syncs your conversations, supports voice input, and brings our latest model improvements to your fingertips. Since the release of ChatGPT, we've heard from users that they love using ChatGPT on the go. Today, we’re launching the ChatGPT app for iOS. The ChatGPT app is free to use and syncs your history across devices. It also integrates Whisper, our open-source speech-recognition system, enabling voice input. ChatGPT Plus subscribers get exclusive access to GPT-4’s capabilities, early access to features and faster response times, all on iOS. Discover the versatility of ChatGPT: We're starting our rollout in the US and will expand to additional countries in the coming weeks. We’re eager to see how you use the app. As we gather user feedback, we’re committed to continuous feature and safety improvements for ChatGPT. With the ChatGPT app for iOS, we’re taking another step towards our mission by transforming state-of-the-art research into useful tools that empower people, while continuously making them more accessible.  P.S. Android users, you're next! ChatGPT will be coming to your devices soon.
As the remaining title contenders continue their NBA Playoff runs, several other teams are preparing for the NBA Draft. This year's event could transform the fate of a few organizations. Victor Wembanyama is the biggest star in this class, but talented prospects like Scoot Henderson and Brandon Miller could also become franchise cornerstones. With the NBA Draft Lottery locking in the top 14 picks, the entire order for the 2023 draft has been finalized. When will the next generation of players hear their names called? Here is everything you need to know about the 2023 NBA Draft. MORE: Biggest winners and loser from NBA Draft Lottery The 2023 NBA Draft will take place on Thursday, June 22. Teams will make selections for both Round 1 and Round 2 that night. The first round will begin around 8 p.m. ET. Fans in Australia can watch the draft starting at 10 a.m. AEST on Friday, June 23. The 2023 NBA Draft will be shown on ABC (Round 1) and ESPN (Round 1 and Round 2). The event can also be streamed on Sling TV. Fans in the U.S. can watch the NBA Draft and playoffs on Sling TV, which is now offering $10 off your first month! Stream Sling Orange for $30 in your first month to catch the lottery plus every playoff games on TNT, ESPN & ABC. Local regional blackout restrictions apply.
SIGN UP FOR SLING: English | Spanish The 2023 NBA Draft will be held at the Barclays Center in Brooklyn, N.Y. There are 58 total picks in the 2023 NBA Draft because the 76ers and Bulls lost second-round picks after violating the league's tampering rules.
By  Adi Robertson, a senior tech and policy editor focused on VR, online platforms, and free expression. Adi has covered video games, biohacking, and more for The Verge since 2011.  Apple has announced an augmented reality headset called Apple Vision Pro that “seamlessly” blends the real and digital world. “It’s the first Apple product you look through, and not at,” CEO Tim Cook said of the device, which looks like a pair of ski goggles. As rumored, it features a separate battery pack and is controlled with eyes, hands, and voice. It will start at $3,499 and launch early next year, starting in the US market with more countries coming later in the year. Vision Pro is positioned as primarily an AR device, but it can switch between augmented and full virtual reality using a dial.  The device is controller-free, and you browse rows of app icons in an operating system called visionOS by looking at them. You can tap to select and flick to scroll, you can also give voice commands, and Apple says “hundreds of thousands of familiar iPhone and iPad apps” will automatically work that way. On top of that, the headset supports Bluetooth accessories, including Magic Keyboard and Magic Trackpad, and lets you connect your Mac to use inside the headset. Downward-facing cameras can capture your hands even if they’re resting low on your body.
Apple’s headset headache: the tiny and costly displays inside the Vision Pro (Financial Times) Apple Plans a Slow, Appointment-Only Rollout of Its $3,500 Vision Pro (Bloomberg) Apple Reportedly Expects To Sell Fewer Than 400,000 Vision Pro Headsets Next Year Due To Production Snags (Forbes)
CUPERTINO, California, June 5 (Reuters) - Apple (AAPL.O) on Monday unveiled a costly augmented-reality headset called the Vision Pro in its riskiest bet since the introduction of the iPhone more than a decade ago, barging into a market dominated by Meta (META.O). At its annual developer conference, Apple also introduced a raft of new products and features, including a 15-inch MacBook Air, a powerful chip called M2 Ultra, improvements to its iOS software and a long-awaited tweak to prevent its autocorrect from annoyingly changing a common expletive to "ducking". The Vision Pro will start at $3,499, more than three times the cost of the priciest headset in Meta's line of mixed and virtual reality devices. The headset will test a market crowded with devices that have yet to gain traction with consumers and put it in direct competition with Facebook-owner Meta after years of clashes between the companies over issues like user privacy and control of developer platforms. Apple emphasized the novelty of the headset's augmented reality features as well as the sports and entertainment partnerships it would offer. The device will use a new chip called R1 that will process information from its sensors in less time than the blink of an eye, Apple said. But the announcements failed to excite Wall Street, which had bid up Apple shares to a record high ahead of the launch. The stock was largely flat in post-market trading.
Apple is working on at least three augmented-reality and virtual-reality headset devices, the first of which will likely launch with the name "Apple Reality Pro," according to Bloomberg's Mark Gurman. Concept render based on purported leaked information by Ian ZelboIn the latest edition of his "Power On" newsletter, Gurman explained that there are a minimum of three Apple headsets actively in development that he is aware of, under the codes "N301," "N602," and "N421." The first of these devices, N301, is what Gurman believes will be called "Apple Reality Pro." Apple Reality Pro is said to be the company's "high-end rival" to Meta's upcoming Quest Pro headset. N602 is reportedly the successor to the first Apple Reality Pro headset and could come in at a lower price point. N421 is Apple's long-rumored augmented reality glasses device, though Gurman cautioned that it may not launch for some time. Gurman's latest report is the first concrete indication of what Apple's first headset product could be called. It is worth noting that the "Reality Pro" name lines up with Apple's recent trademark filings. Last week, Bloomberg reported that Apple has trademarked several terms believed to be associated with its upcoming headset devices, including "Reality Processor," "Reality Pro," and "Reality One.
McGirt: Well, in my own defense, I was at an ESG conference, and I came back with some amazing potential guests for Leadership Next. So you should consider it a scouting mission, and I promise you it’s going to be value added. Murray:  We should go to Aspen more often, but let’s talk to Kate. [Music] Murray: Kate, let me first of all, just welcome you, thank you for being here, and get you to tell us a little bit about what Maven is and how you got started. Kate Ryder: Thank you so much for having me. Thrilled to be here in Aspen. So I founded Maven in 2014 because I saw firsthand a lot of the gaps in the in the women’s and family health care model. And so, you know, you think about it, about 40% of new moms are dropping out of the workforce after they have kids, and the entire LGBTQ community has been left out of the family-building model, because there weren’t benefits for things like IVF for adoption or surrogacy. We have the highest rate of maternal mortality in the developed world, and we’re also the richest country that spends the most on health care. And so you know, what Maven does is we really fill in all of these very distinct gaps through a virtual care and financial support platform. So we have the largest telehealth network and women’s and family health.
Past fundraising rounds attracted successful American women including Oprah Winfrey, Mindy Kaling, Natalie Portman, and Reese Witherspoon. Sign up for our weekly, original newsletter that goes beyond the annual Disruptor 50 list, offering a closer look at list-making companies and their innovative founders. Ryder has said in the past that her determination to create Maven came partially as a result of her own medical frustration and trauma. A miscarriage left her feeling "lost, discouraged, and confused why something so painful and physically taxing was considered outside the bounds of traditional healthcare," she wrote in a blog post. With the new funding, Ryder said the company needs to be careful about how it scales, but will not be conservative with the cash despite the current economic environment given the need to invest in growth opportunities. "We're not putting this capital aside for a rainy day," she wrote on Monday. Global family benefits growth and Medicaid are two areas that Maven is prioritizing with the new funding. The family benefits will build off of the virtual platform that grew during Covid and include new features for Maven Wallet, the company's financial reimbursement platform. Additional Medicaid expansion requires "a more localized approach, which must be more deliberate," Ryder said, "but particularly in the aftermath of Roe, the need has never been greater." The Maven CEO laid out some more of her strategic thinking after the fundraise in a series of Twitter posts. Got a confidential news tip?
The 2023 United States Open Championship was the 123rd U.S. Open, the national open golf championship of the United States. It was a 72-hole stroke play played from June 15–18 on the North Course of Los Angeles Country Club in Los Angeles, California. It was the first U.S. Open to be played in Los Angeles since Riviera Country Club hosted the tournament in 1948.[1]  Wyndham Clark, who had never finished better than 75th in a major championship and had missed the cut in his previous two U.S. Opens, shot a final-round 70 to finish at 10-under-par for the tournament and hold off four-time major champion Rory McIlroy by one shot for his first career U.S. Open and major championship .[2]  Rickie Fowler and Xander Schauffele both broke the U.S. Open scoring record by shooting 62 (−8) in the first round. Fowler, who was tied with Clark for the lead at the start of the final round, ended up tied for fifth place, while Schauffele finished 10th.[3]  On July 22, 2015, the United States Golf Association (USGA) announced that Los Angeles Country Club was selected to host the 123rd U.S. Open in June 2023. The USGA had made overtures to the club for at least 26 years.
McClure is also targeting another golfer for his 2023 U.S. Open one and done picks that excels in big events against top flight competition. This player has been red-hot all year, but consistently flies under the radar and has the ability to win any tournament he enters. You can find out who it is, and check out all of McClure's U.S. Open one and done picks at SportsLine. Who wins the 2023 U.S. Open, and which golfers should you target for your PGA one and done picks this week? Visit SportsLine now to get Mike McClure's U.S. Open 2023 one and done picks, all from the DFS pro with over $2 million in career winnings, and find out. © 2004-2023 CBS Interactive. All Rights Reserved. CBS Sports is a registered trademark of CBS Broadcasting Inc. Commissioner.com is a registered trademark of CBS Interactive Inc.
Get access to essential strategic content, in-depth reports, industry intelligence, and exclusive data. Get access to essential strategic content, in-depth reports, industry intelligence, and exclusive data. Get access to essential strategic content, in-depth reports, industry intelligence, and exclusive data. Get access to essential strategic content, in-depth reports, industry intelligence, and exclusive data. Sign Into Digital Commerce 360             Forgot your password?  Amazon announced its first Prime Day of 2023 will take place on Tuesday, July 11, and Wednesday, July 12, confirming predictions from industry experts. Sellers had earlier been told they needed to submit their deals for the first Amazon Prime Day of 2023 by April 28th. Amazon.com Inc. is planning a second Prime Day for 2023, according to marketplace sellers who say they have been notified of an August 11 deadline to submit deals for the event. Amazon is No. 1 in the Top 1000. The database is Digital Commerce 360’s ranking of the largest North American online retailers. Amazon is also No. 3 in the Online Marketplaces database, which ranks the 100 largest global marketplaces. Prime Day is now Amazon’s biggest sale of the year. It is usually held during the summer months. In 2022, it was July 12 and July 13. The annual two-day deals event is for Prime members only.
12.  Now we do not yet have confirmation that Amazon will have another Early Access Sale this year. But should Amazon decide to have another Early Access Sale — and there's no reason to think it won't — you can be pretty sure it'll take place around the same time in October. Basically, the second Prime Day event served as a preview to Black Friday deals, which means it would almost have to take place at the same time in the calendar.  If, for some reason, Amazon decides to skip the Early Access Sale this year, then you'll probably have to wait until Summer 2024 for the next Prime Day. Over the last few years, Prime Day has fallen in June or July.  If you missed out on the latest Prime Day, fear not, because retailers likes Walmart and Target have started their own sales to rival Prime Day. And those deals are still for the taking.   More in Amazon, Prime Day  Tim Marcin is a culture reporter at Mashable, where he writes about food, fitness, weird stuff on the internet, and, well, just about anything else. You can find him posting endlessly about Buffalo wings on Twitter at @timmarcin.
Play Now                                                           Football Pick'em                                                               Play Now                                                           College Pick'em   See who to add and drop   PGA Tour and beyond  Fittingly, Super Bowl LVI was won by the NFL's most prolific offensive player. Cooper Kupp's 1-yard touchdown with 1:25 left served as the winning score in the Rams' 23-20 victory over the Bengals. Kupp was named Super Bowl MVP after catching 8 of 10 targets for 92 yards and two touchdowns. Kupp is the eighth receiver to win Super Bowl MVP.  Kupp's 11-yard touchdown reception early in the second quarter gave the Rams a 13-3 lead. He caught four passes for 34 yards on the Rams' game-winning drive. Kupp also converted a fourth-and-1 with an 8-yard run on a jet sweep with five minutes left.  "I don't feel deserving fo this," Kupp said on the podium after the game, via NBC Sports. "God is just so good. I'm just so thankful for the guys I get to be around."  COOPER KUPP FOR THE LEAD!📺: #SBLVI on NBC pic.twitter.com/PTY7GWXBig Kupp recently became the first wide receiver to receive a regular season MVP vote since Randy Moss in 1998.
7] The most recent Super Bowl MVP, from Super Bowl LVII held on February 12, 2023, is Kansas City Chiefs quarterback Patrick Mahomes.  Tom Brady is the only player to have won five Super Bowl MVP awards (four with the New England Patriots and one with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers); Joe Montana won three and four  other players—Bart Starr, Terry Bradshaw, Eli Manning, and Patrick Mahomes—have won the award twice.[8] Starr and Bradshaw are the only ones to have won it in back-to-back years. The MVP has come from the winning team every year except 1971, when Dallas Cowboys linebacker Chuck Howley won the award despite the Cowboys' loss in Super Bowl V to the Baltimore Colts.[9] Harvey Martin and Randy White were named co-MVPs of Super Bowl XII, the only time co-MVPs have been chosen.[10][11] Including the Super Bowl XII co-MVPs, seven Cowboys players have won Super Bowl MVP awards, the most of any NFL team. Quarterbacks have earned the honor 32 times in 57 games (and 58 awards).[12]  From Super Bowl I to Super Bowl XLIX the Super Bowl MVP won a new car from General Motors as a part of their MVP award. However since Hyundai became the official vehicle partner of the NFL from the 2015 NFL season onward no new car has been awarded to the Super Bowl MVP since Super Bowl 50.[13]
